[Amit Varma]: Why do we read books and watch movies? Part of the reason is to immerse ourselves in the
[Amit Varma]: heads of other people, experience many lives instead of just our own. But the other great
[Amit Varma]: reason is not about discovering others, but about discovering ourselves. I sometimes wonder
[Amit Varma]: how much of my own self do I truly know? When I look back on how I viewed myself in my 20s,
[Amit Varma]: I realized that I did not know myself at all. I had a flat, distorted view of who I was.
[Amit Varma]: There were layers to me that I did not see. And what I did see was a misleading outline.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sure that despite my best attempts at self-reflection, that is true even today.
[Amit Varma]: How do we get past this? Art is one way. When we read books and watch movies, then through
[Amit Varma]: the lives of others, we discover parts of ourselves that we did not know existed. I'm
[Amit Varma]: sure you also felt that shock of recognition when something in a book or a film touches
[Amit Varma]: you deeply. And it touches you deeply for a reason. The more we immerse ourselves in
[Amit Varma]: books and films, the better we know ourselves. Just as art can increase our empathy for others,
[Unknown]: it can increase our understanding of ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Jai Arjun Singh, best known as a
[Amit Varma]: writer on film, but who also writes brilliantly about books and culture in general. I first
[Amit Varma]: met Jai in the heady blogging days of around 2004. I used to blog at India Uncut, his blog
[Amit Varma]: was called Jabberwock, and I immediately fell in love with his writing on films and books.
[Amit Varma]: The one quality that I liked about Jai's work is best expressed by Javed Akhtar's favourite
[Amit Varma]: word, Thairav. I can't think of a precise English translation for it, though I'd describe
[Amit Varma]: it as a kind of stillness that allows for reflection. In Jai's case, often self-reflection
[Amit Varma]: through the prism of art. That quality was something that you could cultivate through
[Amit Varma]: the form of blogs. Newspapers and magazines did not give you that space of freedom, and
[Amit Varma]: left a writer breathless because of the need to rush through what they wanted to say.
[Amit Varma]: Jai went on to write books on the film Jaane Bhi Do Yaaro, the director Rishikesh Mukherjee,
[Amit Varma]: and he also edited an anthology of essays on films called Popcorn Essays. I still look
[Amit Varma]: forward to everything he writes, and I absolutely love this conversation. We spoke about the
[Amit Varma]: loneliness of growing up as a film lover in the 80s and 90s, how taste can both shape
[Amit Varma]: and be shaped by the circumstances of your life. What happens when art is viewed through
[Amit Varma]: ideological prisms, as often happens these days. And Jai also coaxed me to revisit Hindi
[Amit Varma]: films of the 1980s, which he says was not such a bad decade after all. Rahul Ravel,
[Amit Varma]: Zindabad, it seems. We actually didn't cover many of the subjects we wanted to chat about.
[Amit Varma]: Three hours is simply not enough. So we'll do future episodes as well. But for now, sit
[Amit Varma]: back and enjoy. And before that, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes when I enter a museum or an art gallery, or just look at pictures of paintings
[Amit Varma]: by great artists, I don't quite know what to look for. I react to them viscerally, but
[Amit Varma]: I often wish I had a more nuanced understanding of the form. Do you also feel that way? If
[Amit Varma]: so, I have the perfect resource for you. Head on over to the sponsors of this episode, Vandrium
[Amit Varma]: at Vandrium.com and check out this great course called how to look at and understand great
[Amit Varma]: art. I'll link it from the show notes. This consists of 36 episodes that are a masterclass
[Amit Varma]: in both art history and art appreciation. So if you're confused by what impressionism
[Amit Varma]: and expressionism have in common, or where the art of the self portrait evolved from,
[Amit Varma]: or what exactly postmodernism is, this is the place to go. Now Vandrium used to be known
[Amit Varma]: as a great courses plus who have sponsored many episodes of the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I love browsing through Vandrium because it has all the great courses from the great courses
[Amit Varma]: plus and videos and documentaries created in partnership with National Geographic, the
[Amit Varma]: Smithsonian and the Culinary Institute of America. It's such a great place to learn
[Amit Varma]: and you can get one month of unlimited free access if you use the following URL Vandrium.com
[Amit Varma]: slash unseen. Let me spell that out for you Vandrium W O N D R I U M.com slash unseen
[Amit Varma]: U N S W N. I'll link it from the show notes. Sign up now for free and free your mind.
[Amit Varma]: Jai, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thanks. Thanks for having me. We've been talking about doing this for a while. Glad
[Guest]: we're finally doing it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in fact, we last spoke about it when I was in fact in Delhi last year, I had come
[Amit Varma]: in February to do a bunch of episodes. I think I recorded some 10 episodes in two weeks in
[Amit Varma]: an actual physical studio. And I remember you and I met in Saket and we had coffee at
[Amit Varma]: this delightful bookshop where I browsed around and discovered future guests. That's the place
[Amit Varma]: where I first saw Tripur Daman Singh's book, for example. And and yeah, and then we went
[Amit Varma]: to this restaurant and we discussed that we have to do an episode sometime and here we
[Amit Varma]: are and just look what the hell happened after that. What have these last few months been
[Amit Varma]: like for you?
[Guest]: Well, it's been tough like it has been for many people, but of course not not as tough
[Guest]: as it as it has been for the worst affected. Getting along being that, you know, in in
[Guest]: keeping with with what we're going to be talking about, I've actually done a few online sessions
[Guest]: and courses about cinema, which is something that I that I probably wouldn't have thought
[Guest]: to start if it hadn't been for the pandemic and, and everything that it engendered, got
[Guest]: into the world of, you know, of online sessions and became comfortable with it. And it's it's
[Guest]: been at least that part of it has been going fairly well. Other things, not so much.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's kind of been I mean, I also started my writing course in April last year, and
[Amit Varma]: it was just off a luck where I thought that, you know, would people be interested, I put
[Amit Varma]: out a tweet asking if people were interested and people said yes, and it's still going
[Amit Varma]: strong. I mean, the 14th cohort is kind of going on now. And it's also interesting, I
[Amit Varma]: was thinking about every time we meet, and we don't meet very often, because, hey, Bombay,
[Amit Varma]: Delhi, though, I must tell you that I meet my Bombay friends less than I meet you, because
[Amit Varma]: you just take it for granted that they're in the same city, right? So you're not fixing
[Amit Varma]: up meetings and going and all of that. But it struck me that we actually met very few
[Amit Varma]: times in the sense that we of course, got to know of each other when we started blogging.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll discuss that period in detail with you also. But so that's, that's when we kind
[Amit Varma]: of came to know each other. And we found this very easy groove to our friendship, as it
[Amit Varma]: were, that every time we meet, we're in the same kind of place. And you know, it's easy
[Amit Varma]: and it's comfortable. And it's almost like a comfort zone thing. And the reason I kind
[Amit Varma]: of bring this up is I've done episodes in the last few months with people I've known
[Amit Varma]: for about as long as you in the same way as you, friends like Deepak Chinoy, Sonia Falero,
[Amit Varma]: who was in Bombay for a few years, so I did spend much more time with her. But it was
[Amit Varma]: interesting and I was just thinking about how friendships develop and form these kind
[Amit Varma]: of grooves. The easiest way to form a group of friendship is of course, when you're in
[Amit Varma]: school or college with someone and you're spending a lot of time together and you figure
[Amit Varma]: out each other's comfort zones and all of that. And the interesting thing is that, but
[Amit Varma]: that is shaped almost by happenstance because you know, your physical location determines
[Amit Varma]: everything, you are in school or you are in college where you are, you can't choose anything.
[Amit Varma]: And also you change over time. So today I have virtually no friends, one or two maybe,
[Amit Varma]: whom I'm still in touch with from sort of my pre 20 life, but I have plenty of people
[Amit Varma]: who are now my friends who I met in the mid-oughties like you, who you meet them because of a common
[Amit Varma]: interest or a common thing you do. And then you just find a groove and that groove is
[Amit Varma]: almost kind of always there. And it's said that later in life, you have trouble making
[Amit Varma]: new friends and both of us are introverts, right? I do find it hard to kind of make new
[Amit Varma]: friends and find these grooves and all of that. And that kind of just got me to thinking
[Amit Varma]: about the nature of friendship and what it is. And because at one level it just seems
[Amit Varma]: so mysterious, you know, sometimes I, in my misanthropic way, I can't figure out why anybody's
[Amit Varma]: friends with anybody. Any thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Well, yeah, well, you know, you've already said quite a bit about it. So it's, you know,
[Guest]: it's kind of bounced as a question. 17 years. Can you believe it? It's been 17 years since
[Guest]: the since the blogging thing happened. I actually remember the first time we met when you had
[Guest]: come to Delhi for something after we had been in touch with, you know, through the blogosphere.
[Guest]: And I was listening to parts of your conversation with Annie Zaidi a while back. And she was
[Guest]: also part of the blog meets of 2004-2005 when we were all being introduced to each other
[Guest]: as KnownTurf and Jabberwock and IndiaUncut and so on. What you were saying, you know,
[Guest]: it's interesting, I quite possibly, though this is don't want to get into competition
[Guest]: territory now, but I quite possibly had even fewer friends than you did in my school years.
[Guest]: In addition to being introverted, I was also very painfully shy. And I know there was a
[Guest]: lot of melancholia, things weren't great on the personal front, there were things, things
[Guest]: going on, having to be away from school for four periods. And it just struck me that one
[Guest]: of the things that happened, you know, when in the early 90s, when I really got into watching,
[Guest]: I got into doing the sorts of things that the few friends I had were absolutely not
[Guest]: interested in at the time, you know, obviously, reading voraciously is one thing that I had
[Guest]: that habit from from an early age, but getting into watching old Hollywood films, then watching
[Guest]: world cinema, getting into all that as an adolescent. And I went through a period of
[Guest]: around six, seven years of crippling loneliness. This is in the pre internet period, where
[Guest]: I was convinced, absolutely convinced that that I would, you know, go my whole life without
[Guest]: ever having the sorts of friends who shared some of these interests, the specific interests.
[Guest]: And then of course, the internet comes along. And then within a few years, you know, of
[Guest]: course, one thing led to another, I got a journalistic job which put me in touch with
[Guest]: people with similar interests, then suddenly a blogging, and the world opens up and then
[Guest]: you know, the people like you are out there, there are people outside India as well, you
[Guest]: suddenly find yourself in touch with who share these interests. And, and suddenly, it's a
[Guest]: very different landscape all around. But yeah, I mean, friendship, I don't know, I just feel
[Guest]: like it's, you know, it's you, you know, one of the cliches that that we're constantly
[Guest]: uttering, and you know, it's, it's, it's completely true, as cliches go, is that all of us contain
[Guest]: multitudes, right? And that we are, maybe we are different things at different points
[Guest]: in our life. In, you know, and, and even at the same point, you can be, you know, different
[Guest]: in one context with one person and, and in another context with another person, I think,
[Guest]: friendships just intersect in so many ways. But, but that being said, of course, there
[Guest]: are some people with whom you have, you know, far more of a, of a kindred thing going on,
[Guest]: you know, across across multiple interest areas. And those perhaps tend to be the more
[Guest]: lasting ones.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when you speak of that crippling loneliness, I kind of identify with that in
[Amit Varma]: a sense. And, you know, there is another kind of crippling loneliness that I think there
[Amit Varma]: is there in today's generation for different kinds of reasons. But in our kind, a part
[Amit Varma]: of it, of course, was that being in India, firstly, you got exposed to so little of the
[Amit Varma]: outside world, like, unlike today, everything wasn't at your fingertips. Like you said,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you've said elsewhere that once you got into foreign firms, you would go to
[Amit Varma]: embassies, and you would take, you know, borrow video cassettes from there. And it was just
[Amit Varma]: an effort to get anything of that kind. And therefore, by default, like first, you're
[Amit Varma]: in a poor country where, you know, culture hasn't flooded in, we are not at that stage
[Amit Varma]: of technology, where everything is on the internet. Secondly, only the very privileged
[Amit Varma]: like you and me can, for example, see those kind of films, you know, you and me were probably
[Amit Varma]: watching the same kind of films at the same kind of time, but we are in different cities.
[Amit Varma]: So there is that physical barrier. And then at a later point in time, that physical barrier
[Amit Varma]: sort of breaks down, which I totally get. So tell me a bit about your childhood years.
[Amit Varma]: Like, what was it like? What were you reading? What were you watching? How did you kind of
[Amit Varma]: get drawn to films and so on?
[Guest]: There are no easy answers to those questions. But you know, anecdotally, what I was reading,
[Guest]: and I know, and this, of course, is true of, you know, this disconnect between the sort
[Guest]: of stuff that you're reading and the sort of stuff that you're watching. There's something
[Guest]: that I think Mukul Kesavan or someone else may have written about this, written an essay
[Guest]: about this, a certain type of urban, anglophone Indian, who's sort of grown up in a city whose
[Guest]: first language more often than not is English, or at least, you know, you're starting in
[Guest]: an English medium school. In my case, my parents spoke with me mostly in English. So so one
[Guest]: is reading Ladybirds and Enid Blyton's and things like that to start with, and then maybe
[Guest]: Amar Chitra Katha comics in English and stuff also. But one is almost exclusively watching
[Guest]: Hindi films. That's the film culture that you're first exposed to. So it's a bit strange
[Guest]: really, when you think back on it, that the world of the famous five is intersecting with
[Guest]: the world of, of the Amitabh Bachchan masala film, which was my preferred movie when I
[Guest]: was, you know, growing up 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 years old. It sounds like the worst cliche on earth,
[Guest]: but really Bachchan was my superhero. And the sorts of films I was most interested in
[Guest]: for the for the longest time, I think right up to the age of 12, 13, 14, were like I said,
[Guest]: the masala Hindi films, the Dishoom Dishoom films, the very macho Bachchan movies, or,
[Guest]: you know, if the film didn't have Bachchan in it, it had to be a multi-starrer with three
[Guest]: or four heroes, you know, the Nagin, Jani Jutha, Dajani Dushman, Rajput sort of movie.
[Guest]: And it's pretty amusing because, you know, a few years ago, as you know, I did a book
[Guest]: on Rishikesh Mukherjee, who was known for the slightly more subdued, gentler, middle
[Guest]: cinema sort of sorts of movies. And when I was working on that book, many people just
[Guest]: assumed that when I was growing up in the single channel era, in the Doodh Darshan
[Guest]: era, like everybody else of my generation, I was besotted by the Rishida movies like
[Guest]: Anand and Chupke Chupke and Golmaal, Babarchi, you know, watching them over and over as they
[Guest]: appeared on TV. And that wasn't the case. I really wasn't at that point in my life when
[Guest]: I was when I was a child. I wasn't interested in these boring movies. I only wanted the
[Guest]: most action packed, masala-dar stuff. I didn't even want to see my favourite actors Amitabh
[Guest]: and Dharmendra in these Bhadralok personas in a film like Chupke Chupke. So there was,
[Guest]: of course, a change in my tastes and a lot of things coming together in subsequent years.
[Guest]: But initially, it was just that. One thing I'd like to just point out is, of course,
[Guest]: many of us are movie buffs or movie nerds at a certain age. One of the differences,
[Guest]: one of the things that distinguishes someone who goes on to become a professional film
[Guest]: critic, writing about cinema is perhaps that from a very early age, I think from when I
[Guest]: was six, seven, eight years old, I just developed this habit of maintaining a register in which
[Guest]: I would write, I would just scribble down the titles and the star casts of whatever
[Guest]: films I saw, because of course, at that age, you're principally interested in the actors,
[Guest]: right? That's what you're interested in. And because you've looked at newspaper, you know,
[Guest]: reviews and star ratings, you've been influenced by that sort of thing. So I had a register
[Guest]: when I was maybe seven, eight years old, where I'd just be writing down things like, you
[Guest]: know, the titles of all the films that I saw, and giving them these massively exaggerated
[Guest]: star ratings, that would go right up to 16 stars, for instance, and what I was...
[Amit Varma]: Out of a five star system.
[Guest]: Yeah, instead of the five star system, so you go from the zero star to the 16 star system.
[Guest]: And, you know, there'd be different sorts of adjective combinations that I would use
[Guest]: to describe what a particular rating meant. And I'd use up all the big words I knew. So
[Guest]: a 10 star film might only be a magnificent classic, but a 16 star film like Sholay, or
[Guest]: whatever, might be a stupendously fantabulous masterpiece or something like that. So I got
[Guest]: into that habit. And this, of course, is when I'm very small, seven, eight, nine years old.
[Guest]: A few years after that, you know, when I was in my adolescence, I also became interested
[Guest]: in rating films, in a perhaps more disciplined and organized way. When I when I got into
[Guest]: old Hollywood films for the first time, and I bought an enormous movie guide called the
[Guest]: Leonard Maltin movie guide of 1990-91. And I lugged it around with me everywhere to video
[Guest]: shops to flip through, you know, to read the entries and individual films that were available
[Guest]: at the store. At that point, again, I got into the habit of maintaining a perhaps more
[Guest]: organized register or diary of the films that I was watching. But by that point, I was also
[Guest]: making little notes like one or two sentence crawls about the film, just something that
[Guest]: struck me about the film, something that I found interesting. And I suppose that was
[Guest]: really a prelude in many ways to writing more analytically about films, which is something
[Guest]: that would happen years later.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we get back to the personal journey, a couple of questions that come to
[Amit Varma]: my mind from this. And one is that the moment you force yourself to give a rating for a
[Amit Varma]: film, I would imagine that it forces you to think a little deeper about the film because
[Amit Varma]: then you have to question, why am I giving it three stars? Why am I giving it four stars?
[Amit Varma]: What are the parameters? And equally, and a question that I'd really save for later,
[Amit Varma]: but it seems apt now is that does actually formally writing about film like at this stage,
[Amit Varma]: of course, you're doing notes, but later on, you go on to actually write about cinema in
[Amit Varma]: a more formal way. Does that force you to think deeper about films? Because one experience
[Amit Varma]: of a film lover can be that you go to watch a film, and you just sit down and you just
[Amit Varma]: watch it and you enjoy it for what it is, you have thoughts about it, but you don't
[Amit Varma]: write them down anywhere. There's no structure to your thinking, you're not breaking shit
[Amit Varma]: down, you're not thinking that, you know, you're not necessarily making historical connections
[Amit Varma]: and going deep in all the many different ways that one can go deep, whether we are talking
[Amit Varma]: about the craft or the form or the, you know, where it stands in the director's previous
[Amit Varma]: work and all of that. So does first giving these kind of ratings and to then actually
[Amit Varma]: writing about cinema, does it force you to engage that much deeper in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: you have thoughts you wouldn't otherwise have had, and because you have had thoughts that
[Amit Varma]: you wouldn't otherwise have had, you are a changed person, you know, would you would
[Guest]: you say that?
[Guest]: Yeah, no, no, no, of course, it does work that way. It still works that way, you know,
[Guest]: in my in my 40s, you know, after all these years of doing this, the one is constantly
[Guest]: being surprised by something, you know, and of course, it happens. And I know this happens
[Guest]: with other writers as well, that very often, I'll, you know, sit down to write about a
[Guest]: film with with only a very basic idea about, you know, of what I'm going to be writing
[Guest]: and a basic sense of what I thought of the film, the two or three points that I'd like
[Guest]: to make about it. And then in the process of, of writing about it, when you're sort
[Guest]: of really getting into it deep at a paragraph by paragraph level, you find yourself articulating
[Guest]: thoughts in the process of writing, and making these little connections that you mentioned
[Guest]: in the process of doing that. It's not the case that that everything is cleanly flowcharted
[Guest]: out beforehand. Sometimes that can happen also, I suspect that can happen when you're
[Guest]: working on a very tight deadline, and you're writing something, you know, for a limited
[Guest]: word count 600 700 words, you know, you can even while traveling by car or something,
[Guest]: and you can be making basic structural notes on your cell phone, and then typing the whole
[Guest]: thing out on the on the computer later. But that is a relatively low investment sort of
[Guest]: review that I'm talking about. And I'm talking about the really, the fairly long form analytical
[Guest]: essay. That's something it happens routinely with me that I articulate my thoughts about
[Guest]: the film and about perhaps my own response to the film and what that says about my mind,
[Guest]: or my, you know, personal experiences, or whatever my life experiences, my feelings
[Guest]: about different things. I articulate a lot of those things to myself in the process of
[Guest]: writing. Now, one thing I just like to touch on something that you mentioned just now about
[Guest]: the sort of film nerd, the sort of film buff who engages deeply with the film, but doesn't
[Guest]: really feel the need to write about it or to put one's thoughts down or to put his or
[Guest]: her thoughts down on paper, or to have it published somewhere. I have to say, I very
[Guest]: often have a deep envy for that sort of movie buff. I have many friends who are like that
[Guest]: friends who are quite possibly bigger movie nerds than I am more capable of being articulate
[Guest]: about a film in conversation than I would be, but who have absolutely no impulse to
[Guest]: write about it, or to sit down and agonize over it in that sense. And I think that's
[Guest]: that's such a wonderful thing. Because you know, I'm always surprising people when I
[Guest]: tell them this, I don't watch anywhere near as many films as people as as people might
[Guest]: think I do. And one reason for that is that every time I watch a film, that stimulates
[Guest]: me in some way, it could be a positive way, it could be a negative way, I need to take
[Guest]: a lot of time out to sit down and, and write something about it, even if I even if it's
[Guest]: being written just for myself, even if it's some scattered fragmented notes, which which
[Guest]: I may or may not use months later in a column, even if it's not a piece that's being immediately
[Guest]: written, I need to sit down and write about it then. And that actually eats into the time
[Guest]: that I might have to watch another film very soon after this. So so it's, it's very, very
[Guest]: rare for me today, for instance, that, that I've watched more than one film in a day,
[Guest]: that almost never happened. And I have so many friends who you know, will will go to
[Guest]: film festivals in the pre COVID world, you know, going to film festivals and watching
[Guest]: four or five films over the course of a day. And that's something that I've never really
[Guest]: done. Yeah, even at the age of 2021. And I was so enthusiastic about festivals or whatever
[Guest]: it was, it's, I've never really had the mental energy to watch a number of films in a day.
[Guest]: Because normally just watching one takes up so much of my mental space and I need to sit
[Guest]: down and think about it, assimilate it, process what I've experienced. I don't know if I what
[Guest]: are the other question you asked? I think I've just gone off on a tangent.
[Amit Varma]: It was essentially about this about, you know, whether this imperative of having to write
[Amit Varma]: about a film, you know, improves your thinking about the film. And therefore, does that change
[Amit Varma]: you as a person like, but the drift I seem to be getting from your answer is that you
[Amit Varma]: are that kind of person anyway, who takes time to process things. So you would probably
[Amit Varma]: or is it a feedback loop where they kind of feed into each other?
[Guest]: No, no, absolutely. But also to perhaps more directly answer what you just asked. Of course,
[Guest]: it works that way. You know, I can think of numerous cases where a lot of films that I've
[Guest]: written about over the years, not coincidentally, I think have been films that touch on various
[Guest]: aspects of the parent child relationship. And I feel that there's a lot of writing that
[Guest]: I need to do in the future as well, perhaps not film related writing, just just general
[Guest]: personal essay writing about my parents, both of whom are now gone and I had very different
[Guest]: relationships with each of them. I've often found that, that I sit down to write about
[Guest]: a film without thinking of it as, without thinking that it's going to turn into a personal
[Guest]: essay at all. And then in the process of writing about it, and of course, I am writing about
[Guest]: the film as well and about what's going on in the film, the quality of the acting or
[Guest]: the directing or the music or whatever it is, all that is there as well. But in the
[Guest]: process of writing about it, I realize that possibly one reason why this film meant so
[Guest]: much to me or stimulated me to, to thought or to the action of writing is because there's
[Guest]: something in it that ties in with my experience with my parents. And then suddenly, you know,
[Guest]: if one is writing an essay length piece or writing the sort of commission piece for someone
[Guest]: where you have a certain amount of leeway to do personal writing as well, I'll find
[Guest]: myself writing four or five paragraphs of personal reminiscence about involving my mother
[Guest]: or my father and tying that in with, with how this particular film affected me. So,
[Guest]: so that happens a great deal as well. And of course, then then the writing and the film
[Guest]: analysis also becomes a conduit for perhaps understanding or articulating something about
[Guest]: oneself about one's personal life.
[Amit Varma]: And one of your books, you've, you know, mentioned that Pauline Kael was once asked
[Amit Varma]: about why she'd never written an autobiography. And she pointed to her anthologies of reviews
[Amit Varma]: and film essays and said, I think I have. And that kind of brings me to my next question,
[Amit Varma]: because it strikes me that people think that a review is, or must be or should be in some
[Amit Varma]: way, some kind of objective thing, right. And you've also spoken at length about how
[Amit Varma]: the earlier form of the review when newspapers in the 90s and 2000s would give like 600 words,
[Amit Varma]: 500 words, and what people came to expect would be just verdicts delivered on the movie
[Amit Varma]: that acting is good. Cinematography is good, so many stars. In fact, I used to have those
[Amit Varma]: Leonard Maltin guides as well. And it is only in retrospect after many years that I've realized
[Amit Varma]: that to me, that's kind of the wrong way to think about films as if there is a hierarchy
[Amit Varma]: of merit, so to say, when different films can appeal to people for so many different
[Amit Varma]: reasons. Now, whether I'm reading about books or cinema, or even when I write about those,
[Amit Varma]: what I have realized is that when I'm reading something, what I value is always something
[Amit Varma]: that is in the realm of the subjective. In fact, what I value is always something that
[Amit Varma]: is coming from the author's personal life and experience and whatever, because that
[Amit Varma]: is the only thing that can make anything worth reading. Anybody can say Starrcast was good
[Amit Varma]: and cinematography was this and it's so many minutes long and this is a plot and spend
[Amit Varma]: 300 words giving the plot. Anybody can do that. What makes an essay on a film or a review
[Amit Varma]: or whatever stand out will necessarily, in a sense, be autobiography, not autobiography
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that there is a book about parents and you relate to that because you're thinking
[Amit Varma]: of your parents, not in that kind of direct sense. But there is some emotional resonance
[Amit Varma]: like in another piece of yours, you mentioned this beautiful phrase by Suni Tarapurwala
[Amit Varma]: where she talks about the spiritual DNA of a film, you know, which I would say could
[Amit Varma]: be the essence of a film. I think this was you were part of a panel on the translation
[Amit Varma]: of books into films. And you were kind of talking about transferring this essence from
[Amit Varma]: one to the other. So and this is something that I feel is true that everything I write
[Amit Varma]: about anything and this is of course not true perhaps of my political op-eds or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: but more and more whatever I do, including this podcast, which is kind of my journey
[Amit Varma]: and the stuff I'm thinking about and the stuff I'm interested in, more and more the things
[Amit Varma]: I find value in and the things I want to do are those things that are imbued with the
[Amit Varma]: personal. What's your thinking about this? And initially, when you start thinking along
[Amit Varma]: these lines, is there something holding you back? Is there like a sense of guilt that
[Amit Varma]: there should be no I in this, that there is something objective about everything and you
[Amit Varma]: have to get that across? And because especially as a news reporter, that is of course true,
[Amit Varma]: that you're just reporting facts and trying to get to the truth, but that's kind of what
[Amit Varma]: it is. But you know, is that something that you begin thinking about that you begin resisting
[Amit Varma]: that should I put so much of myself into this? And at what stage do you begin to realize
[Amit Varma]: that this is a dope, this is what I want to do, and so on?
[Guest]: Now almost needless to say, I agree with pretty much everything you said there about the importance
[Guest]: of subjectivity and the interestingness of subjectivity. To answer the last thing you
[Guest]: asked just now, I can say with some pride that I've never felt guilty about the possibility
[Guest]: of putting an I into my writing. What I have felt early in my career, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: when I was 20, 21, 22 years old, you know, as a journalist, obviously subject to a much
[Guest]: greater degree to the hegemony of one's bosses, and the things that they expected you to do.
[Guest]: At that point, of course, you did run into the sort of senior editor who would frown
[Guest]: on the use of an I in a review. And that's something you still have, even today in 2021,
[Guest]: you know, in some mainstream publications, you know, including a couple that I write
[Guest]: for right now, where you will get told by the person who's commissioned the piece, listen,
[Guest]: so on. So this guy at the top, he's a bit conservative in his thinking, you know, he
[Guest]: doesn't like the first person. So you know, so you make those little adjustments, if you
[Guest]: if you feel that that is still worth your time, and you know, the money is worth it,
[Guest]: or whatever it is. And here I'm talking about the very short form sort of review that that
[Guest]: does not involve a lot of personal investment for me. So I'm okay with with doing an objective
[Guest]: seeming review, structurally objective seeming, though it is, of course, still completely
[Guest]: subjective. And I'm okay with doing that for a certain sort of publication. But generally
[Guest]: speaking, the throughout my writing life, my professional writing life, including those
[Guest]: earliest years, but the sort of writing I was most interested in was the navel gazing,
[Guest]: you know, and I'm saying that in a deliberately self deprecating sort of way, there's a sort
[Guest]: of writing that gets described as navel gazing by a lot of people. I just took it as a given
[Guest]: that anything I write with seriousness of purpose, and with integrity is going to be
[Guest]: as much about me and the way my mind works as it's going to be about the thing that's
[Guest]: being written about. I just took that as a given. And I didn't even see that as an arrogant
[Guest]: position. I somewhat similar to what you said that, you know, to me, it was self evident
[Guest]: as a reader as well that, that I would be most interested in review or the sort of work
[Guest]: of criticism or the sort of essay that provided a glimpse into how a particular sort of mind
[Guest]: received a particular sort of film or book or whatever it was, that's the sort of film
[Guest]: writing that I had been very interested in. When I first seriously got into film literature
[Guest]: in my adolescence, around the time that I started watching old Hollywood films, I also
[Guest]: started seeking out a lot of film literature by people like Pauline Kyle, who was one of
[Guest]: the obvious suspects, but also a few other writers who had done books on Hitchcock, on
[Guest]: Howard Hawks, and a few others. And I always found that writing, that sort of personal
[Guest]: writing, very interesting, very stimulating. Now, when I did that Rishikesh Mukherjee book
[Guest]: that I mentioned, I was clear from the start that the book would be as, however arrogant
[Guest]: this sounds to some people, that the book would be as much about my mind as it would
[Guest]: be about Rishikesh Mukherjee's films. And I really did not mean that in an arrogant
[Guest]: way at all. And I meant that as a compliment to Rishikesh Mukherjee's films for stimulating
[Guest]: my mind in a certain way. But of course, what happens then is that, that when you've written
[Guest]: a book like that, and the book has, you know, the publisher has marketed it, you know, to
[Guest]: make it seem like it might be a little more biographical than it is, a little more anecdote
[Guest]: driven than it is. And then of course, people start reading the book, people pick it up
[Guest]: on Amazon, and instead they start writing online reviews of the book. I actually have
[Guest]: a number of one star reviews of that book on Amazon, which say things like, this book
[Guest]: is not about Rishi, Rishida, this book is about J R Junsing. And an objective book about
[Guest]: Rishikesh Mukherjee's films would have recognized the brilliance of Anand, but this book
[Guest]: hardly says anything about Anand. So that sort of thing. And I took that sort of thing
[Guest]: as a big compliment in a way, even though of course, it hurts to have one star reviews
[Guest]: on online forums. Because really, to my mind, and again, coming back to what you touched
[Guest]: on earlier, at a time when the internet is full of hundreds, maybe 1000s of blog posts
[Guest]: about a high profile film like Anand or Golmaal, a lot of which are basically just saying the
[Guest]: same thing over and over again, providing a plot synopsis, and saying something very,
[Guest]: you know, very trite, in my view, like, Anand is a film, is an inspirational film about
[Guest]: a man who teaches everybody that, that death can be conquered, something really obvious
[Guest]: like that. And once it's been said 1000 times all over the internet, I feel like if I'm
[Guest]: doing a book about Rishikesh Mukherjee's films, I want to say something about the Anand that
[Guest]: I experienced, and maybe bring something new to the table that has not been said before.
[Guest]: And if I can do that, honestly, I mean, it shouldn't be a contrived thing, of course,
[Guest]: it should, it should come honestly, from from my engagement with the film, then that's what
[Guest]: I want to do. I don't want to just write something that you can easily find on Wikipedia anyway.
[Guest]: So so yeah, so agree with pretty much everything you said.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And also, it strikes me that number one, that whole expectation that there can
[Amit Varma]: even be an objective book about Rishi Das films, for example, is completely untrue.
[Amit Varma]: There is no like universal truth to them that is there to capture everybody views it differently.
[Amit Varma]: Even Rishi Das would have viewed it differently and not gotten that. And I think that, and
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you that though I can tell it hurts, I can tell the one star reviews hurts.
[Guest]: Oh, you're...
[Guest]: If I can just interrupt for a second, what you said there is absolutely true. Because
[Guest]: you know, if you were to read Rishikesh Mukherjee's interviews over a period of 30-40 years, he
[Guest]: is contradicting himself all the time, even about his own films, you know, then, you know,
[Guest]: one of the things I found fascinating was the sense of a very conflicted man working
[Guest]: in a mainstream film industry where a certain degree of compromise was required.
[Guest]: You knew what, you know, how mainstream Hindi films tended to be made in the 60s, 70s, without
[Guest]: bound scripts, often, you know, with with producers dictating things, the star system
[Guest]: dictating things.
[Guest]: In the midst of all that, if you have a director with a certain sensibility of his own having
[Guest]: to make compromises every now and again, or do things on the fly, of course, there's going
[Guest]: to be a lot of self-beratement happening.
[Guest]: At the same time, there's going to be defensiveness once in a while, if he gets criticized by
[Guest]: someone else, he'll stand up for himself.
[Guest]: So if you read his interviews, in one interview, he'll say one thing about Golmaal.
[Guest]: In another interview, he'll say something that sounds very different about it.
[Guest]: So you know, so the subjectivity as you suggested just now comes in even with the creative person.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's appropriate that you know, one should have conflicting views on a film
[Amit Varma]: with a title like Golmaal.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that that's not necessarily just true of him.
[Amit Varma]: It's true, I think of every creator in the sense that you are driven to do certain things,
[Amit Varma]: you may not yourself know where those impulses come from, and why you're driven to do them.
[Amit Varma]: You tell a story to yourself about them, that story can change as your self image changes,
[Amit Varma]: or as your desire to project a certain image of yourself to the outside world changes.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a sort of constant mishmash of changing narratives inside your own head.
[Amit Varma]: And I would still say that, you know, then a naysayer would say that, okay, if Jai Arjun
[Amit Varma]: is talking about Rishi Das films from his point of view, or if Amit is pursuing his
[Amit Varma]: intellectual journey in his podcast, why should the rest of us be interested, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's just personal, you enjoy it, let your friends listen.
[Amit Varma]: But I think that's just the wrong way around.
[Amit Varma]: Because I think what then someone like you is doing is if you're exploring a certain
[Amit Varma]: avenue, and you know what those films meant to you, I think a lot of people are trying
[Amit Varma]: to figure stuff out, like when I try to figure stuff out through the show, a lot of people
[Amit Varma]: are on similar journeys where they're trying to figure stuff out.
[Amit Varma]: And your journey is relevant to everybody.
[Amit Varma]: For that reason, as long as you do it honestly, and you do it in an authentic way, and you're
[Amit Varma]: not just being performative, I think it's of tremendous value.
[Amit Varma]: For that reason, by the way, I got to tell you that I am one of these people you just
[Amit Varma]: derogatory said they watch four or five films a day during film festivals.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and for the last few years while Mami was on, that was pretty much my routine
[Amit Varma]: during Mami where I'd watch some 28, 29 films in the week that it was on and I would also
[Amit Varma]: kind of live tweet about it almost like not during the film, but after every film, I'd,
[Amit Varma]: you know, have a little bit and I found that it helped because putting a tweet about something
[Amit Varma]: compressing it in so many characters would just force me to think a little deeper about
[Amit Varma]: why I liked it and why I didn't like it.
[Amit Varma]: I think that kind of sharpens your thinking like going back to what you said earlier,
[Amit Varma]: like in my writing course, I'll often quote Joan Didion, who once said that, I don't know
[Amit Varma]: what I think until I write it down.
[Amit Varma]: So the process of writing is not just a way of Oh, I'm thinking something I got to put
[Amit Varma]: that on paper.
[Amit Varma]: The process of writing can shape your thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And in that sense, kind of shape the person you are.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, let's go back to biography now.
[Amit Varma]: As you can see, I'm treating you the way you treated Rishida.
[Guest]: I just wanted to, I wanted to quickly add to that, that Joan Didion quote, Roger Ebert
[Guest]: had had something along those lines, I don't remember the exact thing, but it was something
[Guest]: like, like, you know, advice to writers that the muse doesn't come, you know, before you
[Guest]: start writing, the muse comes while you're writing, when you sit down to write.
[Amit Varma]: Which is why discipline and process is so important.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of my four webinars in my writing course is just about process, which people
[Amit Varma]: kind of ignore, people think if you understand the craft, you have an intellectual understanding
[Amit Varma]: of what a good sentence is, you are covered, no, you're not covered, you still had to get
[Amit Varma]: your ass down and actually write the damn thing.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, one thing I was kind of struck by, and I haven't thought about it in these
[Amit Varma]: terms before, though, you know, the thing about people containing multitudes is actually
[Amit Varma]: a cliche on my show.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a cliche I'm kind of guilty of, it's so true, but the context in which I'd never
[Amit Varma]: thought of it is how you mentioned that people like us people like you and me, the English
[Amit Varma]: speaking elite, so to say, in 1980s India, would be reading one kind of thing, but watching
[Amit Varma]: entirely another kind of thing, though, there also, I was a child of privilege, because
[Amit Varma]: my dad was a director of the FDII from the mid 80s.
[Amit Varma]: So I got to watch a lot of world cinema as a matter of course, but in general, there
[Amit Varma]: is this classic disconnect where it's almost like we are one person when we read an English
[Amit Varma]: book, we are another person when we watch a Hindi film.
[Amit Varma]: And my question to you is about, when does that sort of shift happen, where initially
[Amit Varma]: you are reading everything, and you're watching everything, and it's entertainment, and you're
[Amit Varma]: just enjoying it and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But at some sense, there is a shift where, you know, some switch goes off.
[Amit Varma]: And you're like, you know, you get it, you get art, you get literature, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I know that sounds kind of pompous, but you get it, you get that there's something
[Amit Varma]: else, there's something deeper, like in my case, like I sometimes say it happened when
[Amit Varma]: I happened to pick up Dostoyevsky's House of the Dead, when I was a 10.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought it'd be a thriller, zombie horror, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And suddenly, you know, my mind is blown.
[Amit Varma]: And then it's my gateway into that kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, in your essay about horror films, and the great book you edited, Popcorn Essays,
[Amit Varma]: you wrote about how, for you, that might have been psycho, where you're watching a whole
[Amit Varma]: bunch of horror films before that, and you're, you know, getting into the genre and really
[Amit Varma]: loving it.
[Amit Varma]: But it's psycho, which is something else, and you're not scared while watching it, but
[Amit Varma]: other parts of you kind of get activated.
[Amit Varma]: Is that shift something that you've thought about?
[Amit Varma]: Is it a gradual thing?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it a one day thing?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a sort of an exhilaration and a hunger that goes with it that, you know, you discover
[Amit Varma]: this whole new world?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: And tell me a bit about this transition then, from someone who is loving films, to someone
[Amit Varma]: who begins to appreciate it in deeper ways?
[Guest]: You know, this is a very difficult question.
[Guest]: I can tell you, it definitely wasn't a sudden shift.
[Guest]: If it was a shift, it was a very gradual one, and it's still going on in my 40s.
[Guest]: I feel like, you know, if I were to spend the next 50 years, you know, writing and thinking
[Guest]: about films, at the end of my life, I would still feel like I was, you know, just a student
[Guest]: in the first grade or something, and hadn't engaged the fraction of everything I could
[Guest]: engage with.
[Guest]: The psycho thing, you know, just to provide context for those who don't know, I'm actually
[Guest]: in the process of writing a lot of these little personal essays that I'm currently doing just
[Guest]: for myself, or putting versions of them up on the blog or on Facebook.
[Guest]: Because this year marks 30 years of, you know, from the summer of 1991, which is a very major
[Guest]: period in my film watching life.
[Guest]: And probably the period that's closest to the sort of shift that you're talking about.
[Guest]: Even though I'm personally reluctant to speak in the language of shifts, as if it's some
[Guest]: sort of, you know, life altering thing, because I continue to maintain that my arc as a film
[Guest]: watcher has been a very weird one, it's not like it's not something as simple as, okay,
[Guest]: I was I was watching only masala Hindi films up to the late 80s or the early 90s.
[Guest]: And then there's a sudden turn into watching old Hollywood and from there getting into
[Guest]: world cinema.
[Guest]: A lot of this is also facilitated by the fact that that satellite TV came to us in the early
[Guest]: 90s.
[Guest]: And, you know, in the mid 90s, star movies had this thing called 100 years of cinema
[Guest]: where they showed all sorts of things for months on end, there were the embassy video
[Guest]: libraries, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So it's why I had access to a lot of stuff.
[Guest]: Things changed for me for around 10-12 years, I was completely out of the world of Hindi
[Guest]: cinema.
[Guest]: I think I just been so sated by that particular sort of filmic language, that over the top
[Guest]: hyper dramatic language.
[Guest]: And because as a personality type, I was very reserved, very emotionally undemonstrative,
[Guest]: it perhaps also in some small ways became a rebellion against hyper drama, against larger
[Guest]: than life things.
[Guest]: And for several years that I got into what, you know, I developed a taste that was almost
[Guest]: exclusively for the more restrained forms, you know, whether it was old Hollywood, which
[Guest]: is a little more subdued than mainstream Hindi cinema, or world cinema by people like Bergman
[Guest]: or whoever.
[Guest]: But having said all that, then in my 20s, I then returned to the fold of Hindi cinema
[Guest]: and found myself appreciating a lot of these larger than life hyper dramatic films, you
[Guest]: know, through new lenses, and finding a lot of emotional resonance in them all over again.
[Guest]: And today, you know, if there's something that I, that I value in myself as a film watcher
[Guest]: or as a film writer, it would just be this that, you know, without any conscious effort
[Guest]: on my part, or some, you know, some deliberate attempt to be a viewer who watches many different
[Guest]: sorts of things, I just developed a sort of egalitarianism as a film watcher, and open
[Guest]: mindedness to all sorts of forms, all sorts of genres, you know, from the, from the really
[Guest]: restrained, you know, the mode of kitchen sink realism, to the larger than life, you
[Guest]: know, language of filmmakers, like, like one of your favorites, Anjali La Bhansali.
[Amit Varma]: I got to point out to the viewers right here that Jai is being ironic because Bhansali
[Amit Varma]: is exactly the kind of film cinema I don't like.
[Guest]: Yeah, well, anybody who's heard your previous podcast already knows that, I suspect.
[Guest]: But, but yeah, so I'm always willing to say that I am resistant in many ways to, to suggesting
[Guest]: that there is a clear cut evolution as a film watcher.
[Guest]: Because also what happens, Amit, I feel is that there's two of, you know, whether one
[Guest]: is talking of cinema or literature, maybe it's just the circles that I move in, you
[Guest]: know, the sorts of people that I interact with most these days, but I feel like many
[Guest]: people just view that evolution in terms of, you know, moving from, from the, the escapist
[Guest]: things you loved as a child, to the more somber things that, that are that are befitting for
[Guest]: you as an adult viewer, when you start, you know, you become more interested in things
[Guest]: like realism or, or whatever, or an understatement or, or authentic pictures of the world around
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: And I don't really feel like I've had that journey.
[Guest]: I think my journey has been much more back and forth like that I today I can, you know,
[Guest]: depending on sort of mood I'm in when I when I wake up in the morning, or the sort of sort
[Guest]: of mood I'm in during the middle of the day, I can just as easily watch a gritty, understated,
[Guest]: completely realistic film, as I can watch an over the top, loud, slapsticky, or melodramatic
[Guest]: film and enjoy it and find some level of stimulation from that.
[Guest]: But to also come back to the question of shifts.
[Guest]: What happened with Psycho really was that it became a turning point for me, because
[Guest]: I watched it, I found it a bit creepy, of course, in some ways.
[Guest]: But again, I just found this tremendous sadness in it as a film, and I related to it in ways
[Guest]: that I perhaps would not have been able to articulate back then as a 13 or 14 year old,
[Guest]: but which I found myself making sense of subsequently, you know, as a young boy who was living with
[Guest]: a single mother with a with a recently divorced mother, having, you know, escaped a house
[Guest]: that had had unpleasantness and violence in it, and now dealing with the new challenges
[Guest]: that came with living as you know, as part of this somewhat unconventional family unit
[Guest]: with my mother and her mother, my nani, who did so much for us, but was also an extremely
[Guest]: boisterous and extroverted person, the sort of person that I was wary of as a child, as
[Guest]: a very shy, introverted child.
[Guest]: So there are all these conflicts going on for an adolescent, for a 13-14 year old.
[Guest]: And I found that watching Psycho with its reflections, especially in this beautiful
[Guest]: scene in the middle of the film, where the Norman Bates character and the Marion Crane
[Guest]: character played by Janet Leigh, they sit and just talk in the parlor.
[Guest]: And for those 10 minutes or so, the film is like, it's like a Bergman film, or a chamber
[Guest]: drama or something.
[Guest]: And they're talking about loneliness, about things like that, and what it means to love
[Guest]: someone and to hate that person at the same time, or to feel like you're in your own private
[Guest]: trap versus being free.
[Guest]: And I just found a lot of resonance in that, a lot of sadness in that.
[Guest]: And that was one of the things that led me perhaps to, you know, it came at a time in
[Guest]: my viewing life when, like I already mentioned, I was starting to get a little tired of, of
[Guest]: the overwrought language of the Hindi films that I was watching.
[Guest]: This is also a time when Bachchan is in decline, serious decline, there have been some truly
[Guest]: ghastly films like Toofaan and Jadugar in the late 80s.
[Guest]: And so it just turned into, it just happened to be a good time for someone like me to start
[Guest]: exploring new pastures and to get into new idioms of filmmaking.
[Unknown]: And one thing just led to another and I became a new type of movie nerd.
[Guest]: Like I said, I was away from the world of Hindi cinema for around 12 years almost.
[Guest]: That said, there's one little caveat, which might confuse this whole narrative all over
[Guest]: again.
[Guest]: In the middle of that 12 year period, I was taken by friends, by the few, you know, friends
[Guest]: slash close acquaintances I had at that time in the college years, to watch Dilwale Dulhania
[Guest]: Le Jayenge in 1995, when it just came out on the big screen.
[Guest]: And I really enjoyed it, I enjoyed it thoroughly.
[Guest]: I'm not sure if I admitted it to myself, or I admitted it to my friends, but I felt stimulated
[Guest]: by it and I was completely immersed when the song sequences came on, when Shah Rukh does
[Guest]: that crazy thing on the piano, early in the film, and I found that fantastic.
[Guest]: It reminded me of some of the Shammi Kapoor films I'd seen.
[Guest]: So I still, even at that point in my viewing life, I obviously had the DNA that enabled
[Guest]: me to immerse into language of mainstream Hindi cinema, it's just that it wasn't important
[Guest]: enough to me.
[Guest]: So after that one DDLJ experience, I didn't go back to watching Hindi films on the big
[Guest]: screen or anything like that.
[Guest]: I went back to the sort of cinema that I had been, you know, that I'd become recently interested
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: It took a while to get back to Hindi cinema.
[Guest]: But yeah, that's, that's roughly what the journey was like, at that point.
[Guest]: It also, it also brought a lot of a lot of loneliness with it, because, because the sorts
[Guest]: of films I was watching, I really did not have any friends, or anyone I could talk about
[Amit Varma]: them with.
[Amit Varma]: All of this is fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And especially, you know, when you when you mentioned Bachchan's bad films, Jadoogar and
[Amit Varma]: all the other rubbish that came around that time, you know, the thought that comes to
[Amit Varma]: my mind is that today, when people look back on the career arc of a person like him, you
[Amit Varma]: know, they can just focus on his good films, and, you know, almost a selection bias.
[Amit Varma]: And they know that there are bad films in that arc.
[Amit Varma]: But it's a historical thing.
[Amit Varma]: But there are people who kind of live through these periods, where I think the 80s was,
[Amit Varma]: you know, not just a bad time for say, Bollywood.
[Amit Varma]: It was also a kind of horrendous time for Western rock, for example, you had all those
[Amit Varma]: hair bands and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: It almost seems like to grow up in that time, I think you and I should get special points
[Amit Varma]: for surviving all the bad art that came out during that time.
[Guest]: I have to say, I somewhat disagree with that, when you say 80s is a bad time for Western
[Guest]: rock, wasn't that the time when, when you had REM and U2 both sort of doing some of
[Guest]: their some of their major early work, and well, a few others.
[Amit Varma]: I'm kind of thinking more about all the hair bands and the big arena bands and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And REM really got into their best phase, I would say in the late 80s, early 90s.
[Amit Varma]: From that period on my favorite REM work is certainly 90s.
[Amit Varma]: And YouTube, of course, Joshua Tree was 80s.
[Amit Varma]: But Achtung Baby was early 90s, if I remember.
[Guest]: So also, I would say at risk of again, confusing the narrative or sort of getting our boxing
[Guest]: gloves on.
[Guest]: Actually, one of the many things I've changed my mind about a bit and I do this infuriatingly
[Guest]: often often to the degree that I go back and look at my blog post written 12-13 years ago
[Guest]: and I find myself disagreeing with everything I've written in a particular post.
[Guest]: But I'm not that sure anymore that the 1980s was was such a bad time for Hindi cinema.
[Guest]: And I'm not let me clarify right at the outset, I'm not talking about the art movement or
[Guest]: the parallel movement.
[Guest]: I'm talking about about a lot of other stuff that was happening, which would include it.
[Guest]: No one's going to suggest that that these films are are interesting from beginning to
[Guest]: end or really, really, you know, organically well created or anything like that.
[Guest]: But I still feel like there was some interesting stuff going on in the mainstream done by directors
[Guest]: like JP Dutta and Mukul Anand and Rahul Ravel, and a couple of others.
[Guest]: And it's not as bad a time as a lot of us think it was.
[Guest]: Also, I think with hindsight, I feel like a case can be made that there was a lot of
[Guest]: a lot more honesty in some of the best of those films, or some of the some of the 80s
[Guest]: films than there has been in the last two decades, where a lot of filmmakers, including
[Guest]: the really good filmmakers who deserve to be respected, seem to just be very aware of
[Guest]: their place in a global world, and constantly having conversations with other international
[Guest]: cinemas, to the degree that they are, you know, that they almost operating in that idiom,
[Guest]: in the idiom of what a certain sort of homogeneous, good film, what most cinastes would describe
[Guest]: as a good film, internationally speaking, should look like.
[Guest]: A lot of the indie Hindi films of the last 10-15 years, I feel have, you know, have formally
[Guest]: modelled themselves on that structure, with very good results.
[Guest]: I'm talking about films that I've enjoyed a great deal, but I do wonder at times if
[Guest]: something has also been lost along the way in terms of, you know, moving away from the
[Guest]: very special language of Hindi cinema as it once used to be, when it was tonally all over
[Guest]: the place, when when it's masala derivatives sort of came from, as we say, as we as we
[Guest]: know, from the from the Parsi and Sanskrit theatres, and you had a lot of tones, mishmash
[Guest]: together in the same film.
[Guest]: I sometimes feel that it's a bit of a loss that we moved away from there as well.
[Guest]: Or at least that there seems to be no place at all for that sort of filmmaking in today's
[Guest]: world unless it's done ironically, unless it's meant to be a nudge nudge wink wink
[Guest]: thing or something.
[Guest]: I do feel that's a loss.
[Amit Varma]: So before we get back to your personal journey narrative, I'll kind of double click on this
[Amit Varma]: digression and kind of ask about this itself, that, you know, I get what you're saying,
[Amit Varma]: you're saying that at that time, filmmakers are, they are what they are, and there's no
[Amit Varma]: pretentiousness that they don't have, like, today, people have, you know, different kinds
[Amit Varma]: of expectations of themselves and all of that and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And we will come to current day cinema a little later.
[Amit Varma]: But just going back to the 80s, my my conception would be that it wasn't that there was like
[Amit Varma]: almost a deliberate ideological decision that world cinema be damned, this is what we do,
[Amit Varma]: we'll continue doing it.
[Amit Varma]: And that therefore, there is a certain kind of purity in that I don't think there was
[Amit Varma]: something like that.
[Amit Varma]: I think it was a lot of the films that were being made were being made not out of that
[Amit Varma]: sort of conviction, but just out of, you know, they were, they were just doing what they
[Amit Varma]: knew, they were just being reactive to what they thought the audiences wanted at this
[Amit Varma]: time.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I understand that there are interesting things happening during this time that we
[Amit Varma]: do Vinod Chopra made Parinda, but again, he's influenced by a lot of world cinema already.
[Amit Varma]: So leaving those kind of outliers aside, the Rahul Ravel's and the JP Dutta's and Decoyette
[Amit Varma]: and all of that stuff, which is kind of happening, but does seem to me filmmakers just focusing
[Amit Varma]: in a mode of giving the audiences what they want getting a box office hit, so to say,
[Amit Varma]: and nothing and I'm not dissing that you live within your culture.
[Amit Varma]: And it's perfectly fine if you want to just do that and do nothing else.
[Amit Varma]: But any thoughts on that?
[Amit Varma]: And specifically, then what are the films that you'd look at during that period and
[Amit Varma]: say that these are films that we should revisit now, it's not as bad as we used to think it
[Amit Varma]: was like, I think Mr. India was 80s.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sure you'd, you know, consider that as part of, but apart from that, what are
[Amit Varma]: the kind of films which you think we should revisit and why?
[Guest]: See, there are lots of films, I'll name a few, but then again, it comes with the necessary
[Guest]: caveat that that many people, maybe you, maybe many others listening to this will not even
[Guest]: agree with me that these are films worth revisiting for this, we have to, you know, again, come
[Guest]: back to the subjectivity of all this.
[Guest]: And one more thing that I'd like to say, which perhaps has a bearing on some of what I'm
[Guest]: talking about is that, that as I've grown older, as a film buff, one of the things that
[Guest]: has happened to me is that I've become far more interested, not in films that are interesting
[Guest]: or well done from beginning to end, or, you know, just just sort of, you know, you look
[Guest]: at the totality of the beast and say, okay, this is a four star film or a five star film
[Guest]: to use the reductive language of star ratings, but films that that might even be pretty average
[Guest]: in some ways, maybe tacky in some other ways, maybe, whatever, whatever word you want to
[Guest]: use, regressive is the word that gets used a lot when we when we talk about any sort
[Guest]: of world cinema, but also has points of interest, also has some sequences, some things that
[Guest]: it does very well.
[Guest]: Now, increasingly, I found myself finding a lot more time for that sort of thing, compared
[Guest]: to, you know, this, this assessment driven idea of what sort of film is it on the whole.
[Guest]: And of course, I'm also speaking with the privilege of being somebody who, who doesn't
[Guest]: do reviews on a very regular basis, I, you know, in the last few years, I've been writing
[Guest]: columns, I've been I've been allowed to write these very whimsical personal pieces, where,
[Guest]: so for instance, two different columns that I've done for two different publications have
[Guest]: actually been about sequences, about moments in a film. And of course, how those moments
[Guest]: tie in with the larger animal. So I've had the luxury of doing that, which is not a luxury
[Guest]: that the regular Friday to Friday film reviewer has. But that is how it's worked for me. One
[Guest]: of the books that I hope to work on in the future, I don't know if I ever will, will
[Guest]: be an anthology of moments, an anthology of important moments from Hindi cinema, which
[Guest]: could be and a moment can be defined as a full length 10 minute sequence, or it could
[Guest]: be an actor's gesture, just a little gesture or the movement of the head, which seems to
[Guest]: speak volumes or whatever it is, and of course, it will be very subjective. So I'm saying
[Guest]: all this also partly to prepare you and your listeners for, for the possibility that some
[Guest]: of the films that I mentioned will may not really be seen by most film buffs as good
[Amit Varma]: films, capital G, capital B. May I just interrupt and say that you don't
[Amit Varma]: have to be so defensive. And when I asked you the question, I did it with the actual
[Amit Varma]: sincere intent of actually revisiting some of this stuff you're talking about to educate
[Guest]: myself. So but anyway, continue. Well, because this is meant to be about my subjectivity
[Guest]: as a person. I have to say I am defensive 99% of the time, when I'm talking about my
[Guest]: tastes. Okay, so just to come back to what I'm saying, you know, just just look at directors,
[Guest]: the interesting works of some directors. And I think some of Subhash Khai's films, including
[Guest]: Meri Jang, which has Anil Kapoor and Meenakshi Chaudhary in it, is one of the relatively
[Guest]: interesting mainstream films of that period. In general, I think you mentioned Mr. India,
[Guest]: of course, which which I think Mr. India is a is actually a fairly respectable film in
[Guest]: many ways, I think. And I think I think there are a lot of people who can just see the craft
[Guest]: of that film and the honesty of that film as well quite easily. But I think this might
[Guest]: be a good time to talk about how many of us have undervalued Anil Kapoor as an actor and
[Guest]: he did so much interesting stuff in the 1980s. Of course, it's amazing that he's, he's still
[Guest]: managed to be relevant in various ways, you know, in the 60s. But, but back then I remember,
[Guest]: you know, when I when I was a kid, in the 1980s, even though I was surrounded by the
[Guest]: world of Mr. India, and Tejab and Parinda and this film called Ishwar in which Anil
[Guest]: Kapoor had a very interesting role and Avargi, you know, a few films like that. Somehow,
[Guest]: this is something that I that I articulated to myself only years later. Somehow I thought
[Guest]: of all these films, in terms of other people in the films, Sridevi, Madhuri Dixit, Jackie
[Guest]: Shroff in Parinda, Nanna Patekar and things like that. Karma, Subhash Khai's Karma in
[Guest]: which it became became so easy to sort of just see Anil Kapoor playing this buffoonish
[Guest]: character jumping around all over the place. And when you and instead you're supposed to
[Guest]: be looking at Dilip Kumar and Newton and, and all that. It's only later many years later
[Guest]: that I realized that Anil Kapoor was was a pretty major part of these films. And he was,
[Guest]: you know, at the very least, quite good in most of them. And you know, he held his own,
[Guest]: he did everything that was required of him. And I think certainly his early career, including
[Guest]: his mainstream career at that time, and of course, there's a slightly not so mainstream
[Guest]: career, which which includes lower profile films like Chamele Ki Shadi, and Saahib, films
[Guest]: like that perhaps deserves to be looked at again. There are of course, films which which
[Guest]: primarily have what one might think, think of as kisshy value or cheesy value, but which
[Guest]: can also be quite stimulating in its own way, if you are in a certain type of mood. So you
[Guest]: know, so so I, I remember that, you know, films like the film in which Jackie Shroff
[Guest]: co-starred with a dog, Teri Meherwaniya, which was, you know, it's a film that even back
[Guest]: then at the age of seven or eight, when I was watching the songs on Chitrahaar, I think
[Guest]: even at that point, one realized that that one was watching something that's a bit silly,
[Guest]: or whatever word you want to use. But again, I watched a lot of that film, not the whole
[Guest]: thing again, but but I think maybe 80% of the film on TV, when it when it happened to
[Guest]: be coming around, maybe 10 years ago or something, and I just found myself absorbed in it and
[Guest]: just watching it. And maybe it has something to do with the fact that, that my own life
[Guest]: had had become quite dog centric by that point. Also, so you know, so so one is interested
[Guest]: in certain things and in what the relationship might be like, at its core. If you look at
[Guest]: it, you know, if you take away the really melodramatic trappings, and just just look
[Guest]: at the emotional core of it, that there might be something to it. I found that interesting
[Guest]: as well. JP Dutta's films definitely deserve to be revisited. Unfortunately, to the best
[Guest]: of my knowledge, there are, you know, major films like Ghulami, for instance, do not seem
[Guest]: to be available in their complete prints anymore. I think it's a more than three hour long film.
[Guest]: And I think it's on YouTube or something in two hours, 20 minutes or something funny like
[Guest]: that. And I don't know how these things even work at times. And Hatyaar, which was another
[Guest]: JP Dutta film, which I was a big fan of, when it first came out, and, and when I watched
[Guest]: it many years later, these are all films that broadly use the language of the mainstream
[Guest]: Hindi film of the 1980s. Overwrought, sometimes, you know, embarrassingly dramatic, loud music
[Guest]: used to used to underline everything. And I know you have a major problem with with
[Guest]: that use of that emotional cue providing use of music. I don't as a rule, I actually actually
[Guest]: find find it very stimulating in many contexts. But I would admit that that a lot of the 80s
[Guest]: films perhaps went over the over the top with it or what you know, it's a bit difficult
[Guest]: to watch some of some scenes in those films, because of how we've now been conditioned
[Guest]: by by the slightly more realistic cinema. This is also true, of course, of old Hollywood,
[Guest]: a lot of the 30s. Last year, when I was hosting these for these film discussion sessions,
[Guest]: and looking at genres like film noir, and the screwball comedy and genre and looking
[Guest]: at 1940s Hollywood films, I found myself cringing just a little bit when even in a really, really
[Guest]: good Billy Wilder film that I love, you know, that that'd be, you know, the music would
[Guest]: be a little more insistent than felt strictly necessary. But on the whole, I don't really
[Guest]: have a problem with with that. I mean, I'm, you know, I find it quite stimulating at times.
[Guest]: But yeah, so JP Dutta, a few of Mukul Anand's films are quite interesting. Rahul Ravel,
[Guest]: you mentioned a film like Arjun, for instance, which is which is which is an interesting
[Guest]: mid 80s take on on the angry young man for the unemployment era, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: There are quite a few others. I'll keep bringing them up over the course of these conversations.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, no, you mentioned my sort of distaste for spoon feeding in the sense background
[Amit Varma]: music that tells you how to feel and all of that. And I've actually been thinking about
[Amit Varma]: that in recent times. And what I've realized is that, at one level, obviously, I prefer
[Amit Varma]: a certain kind of understatement, where I am being manipulated as little as possible.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what's happening is happening. But then the point is that manipulation is
[Amit Varma]: inevitable. Because every choice that a director makes within a film has a certain effect on
[Guest]: the even even even in a documentary, every second of a film, even in a documentary. So
[Amit Varma]: even when Ozu keeps a still camera in Tokyo story, and people are doing what they're doing,
[Amit Varma]: he has still chosen to keep it still he's chosen to keep it in a particular place, he's
[Amit Varma]: chosen to keep it for that bit of dialogue and not some other, all these are choices
[Amit Varma]: are affecting you. So you're being manipulated. Anyway, people may manipulate you in understated
[Amit Varma]: ways or they may manipulate you in, you know, more flamboyant and obvious ways. But what
[Amit Varma]: is happening is what is happening. So even if you look at say the, you know, Lars von
[Amit Varma]: Trier's dogmy kind of school that we won't have background music, and we won't have this
[Amit Varma]: and we won't have that. But the bottom line is even those are choices. There's no way
[Amit Varma]: to kind of get away from the artifice of, you know, the act of creation, whether you're
[Amit Varma]: telling a story through a book or a film or whatever.
[Guest]: But you know, you know, that's, sorry to interrupt you. That's, that's, that's a very good point.
[Guest]: There's also another thing to be said, which maybe we can touch on a bit later about the
[Guest]: personality divide, you know, and what you said just now, actually chimes with with something
[Guest]: that I've had to think about a lot in recent years. And as I mentioned, one possible reason
[Guest]: why I needed to get away from, from the language of, of the typical mainstream Hindi film as
[Guest]: an adolescent was because it was just sort of it was, it seemed too connected. And then
[Guest]: there's something I wrote about in an essay a couple of years back also, and I ended up
[Guest]: articulating it in the process of writing it, it felt too close to certain other things
[Guest]: that I was feeling stifled by as a very introverted, very undemonstrative kid, you know, the boisterousness
[Guest]: of my nani, my grandmother, a woman who loved me a great deal, but also was too loud and
[Guest]: extroverted for my liking and, you know, and moving away in some ways from her world. And
[Guest]: you know, when it became possible for me to, you know, to have a videocassette player in
[Guest]: my room, and to keep my door shut and to sit down and watch Hitchcock and John Ford, instead
[Guest]: of watching the latest Salman Khan film of 1991. So all that is there, but I've also
[Guest]: had to think about this a great deal that there are coming back to the multitudes that
[Guest]: all of us contain. One thing that I've always been a little puzzled about, in you know,
[Guest]: in my own personality, when it when it comes to how I watch films, or how I respond to
[Guest]: films is how very often there's, you know, I find myself identifying with a character,
[Guest]: or really feeling, feeling drawn to a character who on the face of it is completely different
[Guest]: from me. You know, there's no, you know, connect at all. And the earliest example I can think
[Guest]: of actually goes back all the way back to my childhood. You know, you're watching Sholay
[Guest]: for the first time, I think it was probably, you know, when I was five or six or seven
[Guest]: years old, and Amitabh Bachchan was everything to me, right. And, in this film, Amitabh
[Guest]: Bachchan is playing a character who has my name, and is playing this very taciturn, slightly
[Guest]: sarcastic character. And that was pretty close to my self perception as well. And you just
[Guest]: think that that is the character I'd be most interested in the film. And I can say this
[Guest]: hand on heart, I can say this, from the earliest that I can remember watching Sholay, and it
[Guest]: continues to this day, I've always found Dharmendra's Veeru far more interesting, far more stimulating,
[Guest]: you know, when the two of them are on screen together, I'm always looking at Dharmendra
[Guest]: and to see what he's doing, you know, to see his, you know, his exaggerated gestures and
[Guest]: his grimaces and other things he does with those huge hands of his. And that's something
[Guest]: that it took me a very long time to even make sense of this, because it's completely counterintuitive.
[Guest]: It makes no sense at all. If you think of, of art or creative works as being things that
[Guest]: that help you, you know, tap into aspects of yourself, then I think a case can be made
[Guest]: that maybe there's a closet extrovert in me, some hidden, boisterous Veeru, who got that
[Guest]: sort of catharsis from watching Dharmendra in that film. And, and there are many other
[Guest]: examples of that sort I can think of.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the example that comes to mind is all the colourful t-shirts and sweaters that
[Amit Varma]: you wear. So maybe those are also your hidden extrovert.
[Guest]: No, I mean, that is a very contrived and deliberate way of, of making up for my, for the dryness
[Guest]: and the boringness of the personality.
[Amit Varma]: It's interesting you say that because, you know, I remember advice that was often given
[Amit Varma]: in my poker playing days, that if you're at a table and you're very tight and you're folding
[Amit Varma]: all the hands, you know, people might notice and exploit that tightness.
[Amit Varma]: So what you got to do is you got to talk a lot. So people feel you're involved, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and they won't realise that you're actually folding everything.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, that's a boring piece of advice and not relevant beyond a certain stage of
[Amit Varma]: play.
[Amit Varma]: Coming back to, you know, what you said about, I mean, I have like 30 questions I have to
[Amit Varma]: ask from what you have spoken about over the last 10 minutes.
[Amit Varma]: But I'll go back to your personal journey. And I'm sort of struck by this beautiful quote
[Amit Varma]: I found in one of your essays.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll read it out a quote, much of the world cinema I now encountered felt like exercises
[Amit Varma]: and coolness and restraint.
[Amit Varma]: Being emotionally undemonstrative myself, I was struck by how there wasn't a need to
[Amit Varma]: talk all the time, how silences in cinema could be meaningful, stop quote, and you're
[Amit Varma]: talking about the time you discovered world cinema, as well, where this almost seems to
[Amit Varma]: mirror that phase in your personal life where your nani is very boisterous, and you are
[Amit Varma]: quiet and introverted, and Bollywood is very boisterous.
[Amit Varma]: And then you discover a kind of cinema that indulges in these silences, that has the same
[Amit Varma]: kind of sceptical attitude towards religion, as it were, as you have, while your nani is
[Amit Varma]: a believer and Hindi cinema is a believer.
[Amit Varma]: And and this got me to thinking about how much are our tastes mirrored by or shaped
[Amit Varma]: by our personalities, because my default assumption has been that our tastes are like hardwired.
[Amit Varma]: We are what we are, you know, for example, speaking for myself, I like a certain kind
[Amit Varma]: of minimalistic, understated cinema, though, I can appreciate why people would like more
[Amit Varma]: maximalist cinema, I can appreciate them at an intellectual level.
[Amit Varma]: But what really appeals to me is more understated, but like certainly in your arc, and it's obviously
[Amit Varma]: not a clear cut arc and all of that, but whatever little I can make out through your writings,
[Amit Varma]: it seems that there is this initial distance that you feel between yourselves and say,
[Amit Varma]: family or nani or whatever, and you turn away from Bollywood and at a later stage in life,
[Amit Varma]: you come back in both senses where of course, you start watching Bollywood again and appreciating
[Amit Varma]: it for what it is.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you've written movingly about how, when your nani passed away, you,
[Amit Varma]: you sort of regretted not talking to her more, not being with her more, all of those kind
[Amit Varma]: of things.
[Amit Varma]: So this is also I think, like at a personal level, and it must be true for so many of
[Amit Varma]: my listeners, that when you're young, you want to express your personality, you want
[Amit Varma]: to break away, you want to feel that autonomy.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, that often means you are kind of going away from your family, you look at
[Amit Varma]: them in harsh ways, perhaps often because one doesn't have the maturity to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: see the full picture to see the multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: And then later on in life, as you become an adult yourself, sometimes you go, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you go back, sometimes you don't, sometimes your vision sort of deepens.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, does this make any sense when this connection of the personal and how one
[Amit Varma]: relates to the art and entertainment one sees?
[Amit Varma]: And do you think that, and again, I'm thinking aloud, my assumption was your taste is what
[Amit Varma]: it is.
[Amit Varma]: But and my taste has changed in different ways over the years, but I would have thought
[Amit Varma]: it's changed on its own.
[Amit Varma]: But do you think there is also a way just by thinking about it by consciously thinking
[Amit Varma]: about why we like the stuff we like and why we don't like the stuff we like, that we can
[Amit Varma]: shape our taste as well that we can make ourselves more appreciative of things we might not otherwise
[Amit Varma]: have liked, like talking to you, for example, I'm definitely going to go back and revisit
[Amit Varma]: some of these films you talk about at the very least, look at your essays on these moments
[Amit Varma]: and kind of try to see through them and who knows, you know, that might kind of make me
[Amit Varma]: look at them in a different way.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think there is that possibility or should one tell oneself that don't get ossified?
[Amit Varma]: You know, keep searching?
[Guest]: Well, as a, you know, as a critic, as somebody who's writing about cinema and who's so nerdish
[Guest]: that you know, he's given over a great deal of his life to doing almost nothing but watching
[Guest]: films and thinking about them and trying to articulate thoughts about them.
[Guest]: I would say and this is advice that I give to anybody, you know, in classes, anyone who's
[Guest]: trying to be a critic or a reviewer, the first thing I say is read, read, please read as
[Guest]: much as you possibly can, watch as many different types of films as you as you possibly can
[Guest]: without getting, you know, into the, into ideas of what is a good film, what is a bad
[Guest]: film, you know, don't get into ideas about categories being bad.
[Guest]: Once you start dealing with individual films, of course, you know, your job is going to
[Guest]: be to say that that something worked for you, something didn't work for you and then to
[Guest]: articulate why it didn't, but don't go into categories thinking that this is innately
[Guest]: bad or this sort of genre or this sort of tone or this sort of mode, or whatever, this
[Guest]: style of filmmaking is bad.
[Guest]: That's one piece of advice I give them.
[Guest]: Now, of course, even while I'm giving it, I know that this is not something you can
[Guest]: force your brain to do, right?
[Guest]: And that's what you're saying.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm sure there's something to what you're saying about what a lot of our tastes
[Guest]: being hardwired in some contexts.
[Guest]: I find if you're asking me personally, and you're asking me about cinema, and maybe about
[Guest]: literature as well, my experience has been that my tastes have not been hardwired, they've
[Guest]: shifted a lot over time.
[Guest]: And it's something like as implied earlier, it's something that I'm quietly proud of the
[Guest]: fact that I seem to have the capacity, I don't know where it comes from, it's not come out
[Guest]: of some deliberate effort, you know, as far as I know, but I seem to have this capacity
[Guest]: to appreciate many different types of things, which is pretty useful.
[Guest]: It's a useful quality to have, if you're writing about books and films.
[Guest]: That said, of course, I completely get that it might not come naturally to everybody.
[Guest]: And that therefore, maybe a case can be made that you make some sort of effort, you put
[Guest]: yourself in this place where, you know, if you're watching films, and you have this innate
[Guest]: resistance to a certain type of film, you don't like the idea of romantic films, mushy
[Guest]: romantic films, or you don't like action films or whatever, then if you're trying seriously
[Guest]: to be a film critic or a film writer, you do have to make a minimum effort, I feel,
[Guest]: to try and get into that world to try and appreciate the terms of that world.
[Guest]: Even this can be very difficult for one very simple reason that there are certain genres
[Guest]: that people can just have a visceral problem with, right?
[Guest]: A bodily problem with horror, horror is the classic example, you know, especially the
[Guest]: jump scare sort of horror, I know so many people, so many friends who don't have any
[Guest]: snobbery or condescension towards horror at all, but who simply cannot watch a horror
[Guest]: film because it's too much for their nerves, they can't deal with it.
[Guest]: Now, if somebody like that wants to become a film critic and is then told to go and watch
[Guest]: a horror film, obviously, it's a less than ideal situation.
[Guest]: I sometimes have a problem with very loud action films, especially if I'm watching them
[Guest]: in a theatre with Dolby sound or whatever, and my ears are being assailed, I get headaches
[Guest]: easily.
[Guest]: So there's a bodily response to that, which can affect the objectivity, quote-unquote,
[Guest]: with which you receive this film or write about it.
[Guest]: This has been a very long and rambling way of approaching what you asked.
[Guest]: But yeah, I do feel like we probably are hardwired in many contexts.
[Guest]: In some contexts, maybe including things that we feel very personally engaged with from
[Guest]: an early age, as I did with cinema and with literature, perhaps one just has sufficient
[Guest]: time to explore many different types of books, films, and to start appreciating them.
[Guest]: Maybe it just works that way.
[Guest]: And that's what we call taste changing over time, or becoming more inclusive.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I don't know if that makes any sense.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, makes a lot of sense and before we go into a break, let's talk a bit about horror.
[Amit Varma]: Because you've got a beautiful chapter in your book, Popcorn Essays, about your love
[Amit Varma]: for horror cinema.
[Amit Varma]: And I was especially struck by this lovely line again, I'll quote you quote, superficial
[Amit Varma]: details of time and place scarcely matter anyway.
[Amit Varma]: As in so many great horror films, the setting is really the human soul.
[Amit Varma]: And it's always nighttime, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that you know, people who are into high art and high literature and
[Amit Varma]: of so on, often tend to sort of condescend to the genres like horror and science fiction.
[Amit Varma]: But I think that many of the finest explorations of what it is to be human actually come from
[Amit Varma]: within the genres like, like there's a 1980 film I recommend everybody watches, which
[Amit Varma]: I'd written a column about, I'll post it from the show notes called Cannibal Holocaust.
[Amit Varma]: And it was directed by this guy called Ruggiero Diodato.
[Amit Varma]: And Cannibal Holocaust is, it's really one of those found film things where these people
[Amit Varma]: discover these videotapes, which were shot by these filmmakers who had gone to some remote
[Amit Varma]: jungles where they were filming cannibals.
[Amit Varma]: And it almost it served as an allegory of something that didn't exist yet, which is
[Amit Varma]: this sort of Instagram age where you're documenting everything, everything is a selfie, which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I wouldn't say not exist yet, because that innate urge for self documentation and
[Amit Varma]: the performative urge, I guess, was always there.
[Amit Varma]: And all of us technologies enabled it in new ways.
[Amit Varma]: And basically, they keep filming each other, one of them dies, one of them, you know, has
[Amit Varma]: his vital organs chopped off and burnt and all kinds of nonsense is happening.
[Amit Varma]: And they're filming everything and eventually they end up filming their own sort of deaths.
[Amit Varma]: And at one level, it's just a gory horror film at another level, I just found it incredibly
[Amit Varma]: profound in all these human instincts that it is kind of looking at.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing is a guy who directed that film, Ruggiero Diodato.
[Amit Varma]: And this was a 1980 film.
[Amit Varma]: He went on to act in Hostel 2 by Eli Roth, where in a lovely scene, he plays this sort
[Amit Varma]: of cannibal client who is, you know, out of a live person, he's carving out a steak as
[Amit Varma]: it were, while, you know, Bide is playing in the background, a very elegant scene in
[Amit Varma]: the hostel films also are sort of fascinating looks at addiction and consumerism and all
[Amit Varma]: of these things.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about your journey through horror.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, I have, of course, watched way, way less than you and, you know, these are
[Amit Varma]: just kind of selective impressions, but you've probably, you know, watched everything there
[Guest]: is in horror.
[Guest]: No, no, I haven't.
[Guest]: I haven't come close to watching everything there is in horror.
[Guest]: I haven't watched so much of the more contemporary stuff or the stuff of the last 20-25 years.
[Guest]: Where does one begin?
[Guest]: One thing I can say is that I'm glad that you mentioned the hostel films, which again,
[Guest]: I haven't seen.
[Guest]: But from what I know about them, those are fairly mainstream horror films, right?
[Guest]: Those aren't respectable horror films, which is a new category of film that I've become
[Guest]: very nervous about.
[Guest]: Having said that one should not judge categories, I will now say that the respectable horror
[Guest]: film is this category that I'm very nervous about because what it leads to in my experience
[Guest]: is a lot of young, woke critics talking about how so-and-so film made by Jordan Peele or
[Guest]: whoever isn't just a horror film.
[Guest]: It isn't a mere horror film, it is something more.
[Guest]: And speaking as someone who loves mere horror films, and who has been endlessly stimulated
[Guest]: by them, I start getting very suspicious when a film is described as something more than
[Guest]: a horror film.
[Guest]: As if horror is something that is innately disrespectful and you have these, you know,
[Guest]: once a very overt layer of social commentary comes into it, you know, it's like, oh, this
[Guest]: is not just a horror film.
[Guest]: This is something that happened, I remember recently in the Indian context with the latest
[Guest]: of these often tedious anthologies that come out on Netflix, where Dibakar and Anurag and
[Guest]: Zoya and Karan Johar are making short films.
[Guest]: So there was the Ghost Stories one, where everybody was raving about Dibakar's film.
[Guest]: And I saw it, and I liked it moderately.
[Guest]: And then I started just reading some of the reviews, and all the reviews were just going
[Guest]: on and on about how, you know, this is a film that just takes horror to a new level, because
[Guest]: it's got this very, you know, what to my eyes was fairly clearly and explicitly spelt out
[Guest]: social commentary about the current state of affairs or whatever, you know, the world
[Guest]: that we're currently living in.
[Guest]: And it used a broad horror framework to do that, but it just became one of those things
[Guest]: that everybody was raving about.
[Guest]: And I was thinking, listen, horror has always had subtexts.
[Guest]: Horror is a subtext to begin with, you know, you go back and read about the history of
[Guest]: cinema, the earliest films when pictures first started moving on walls, and the first generation
[Guest]: of film viewers had to deal with this horrific thing happening in front of them, you know,
[Guest]: characters moving in front of them.
[Guest]: And then this horrible, ghastly thing called the cut came along, where there's a cut from
[Guest]: one scene to a completely unrelated scene.
[Guest]: And the shock that would have provided to the nervous systems of the first generations
[Guest]: of viewers.
[Guest]: Horror is built into cinema's DNA, to start with, you know, it taps into some of our deepest
[Guest]: fears about technology, about where we can go with it.
[Guest]: So the subtext is there to begin with, even before you start exploring what the theme
[Guest]: of a particular film is, even before you start talking about whether, you know, whether Dracula
[Guest]: has this, or whether Frankenstein has this deep rooted theme about man playing God or
[Guest]: whatever it is.
[Guest]: In the context of cinema, horror is just, you know, it really is, I mean, you could
[Guest]: make the case that it's a synonym for cinema, it's just another word for cinema.
[Guest]: And I find it a little, for lack of a better word, I find it a bit pretentious when people
[Guest]: are constantly looking for horror films having these very explicit layers of social commentary
[Guest]: in them.
[Guest]: This is not to say that a Jordan Peele film is not a good film in its own right, you know,
[Guest]: for what it is.
[Guest]: It's just that I feel like I've got a bit of a mental block against that sort of reaction
[Guest]: to horror cinema, which is also why, to come back to what I was saying earlier, I'm glad
[Guest]: to hear you talk about the more lowbrow, quote unquote, films like Hostel or Cannibal Holocaust
[Guest]: or whatever.
[Guest]: Again, there's been lots of personal resonance for me now, you know, coming back to the parent
[Guest]: child theme that I've always found interesting in a lot of the art that I've consumed.
[Guest]: Psycho is one thing, there's this wonderful film, this French film called Eyes Without
[Guest]: a Face, which is the English title by Georges Franjou, which is also a 1960 or 61, which
[Guest]: is pretty gruesome in some ways, though, of course, it's undercut by the fact that it's
[Guest]: a black and white film about a young woman whose face has been disfigured and her mad
[Guest]: scientist father who's trying to set her right by finding other young women whose faces can
[Guest]: be used for the purpose, quite visibly in terms of its subject matter.
[Guest]: But again, a very moving film in many ways, and if you just look at it in terms of the
[Guest]: father daughter scenes in it, and the desperation of this man, who is a horror movie monster,
[Guest]: but is also a tormented father, you know, things like that have always, you know, hit
[Guest]: me in, you know, in some place that I can't fully articulate.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, lots to explore there, which we'll do as the show goes along, you know, how your
[Amit Varma]: political lens can influence the way you look at art, how young people today perhaps consume
[Amit Varma]: art and discover art and how they view it all fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: But before we go in for a break, you know, you were talking about the spectacle of the
[Amit Varma]: early movie, what's the phenomenon of the cut and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So I just want to read out this lovely quote by you about the magical quality of films,
[Amit Varma]: where you write quote, there's a popular story from the earliest days of moving pictures
[Amit Varma]: about the unprepared viewers of a Lumire brothers short film, who ran out of a Paris
[Amit Varma]: theater when confronted with the image of a train seemingly coming towards them.
[Amit Varma]: This is probably apocryphal, but there are other similar less dramatic stories from that
[Amit Varma]: period and even common sense tells us that the first movie viewers must have experienced
[Amit Varma]: quite a few shocks to the system.
[Amit Varma]: Today, even the most casual viewers unconsciously process such aspects of film grammar as cross
[Amit Varma]: cutting between unrelated scenes.
[Amit Varma]: But in the earlier days, even basic cutting from one image to another, let alone rapid
[Amit Varma]: fire splicing must have felt otherworldly, to some it must have been frightening, even
[Amit Varma]: demonic.
[Amit Varma]: Was that puffing train the first movie monster, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, this this also we take cinema for granted, we are not struck by any of it
[Amit Varma]: as such.
[Amit Varma]: But this was something that was that even perhaps this view of cinema as something that
[Amit Varma]: influences people more profoundly than say books or art was something that led to our
[Amit Varma]: censorship laws, because, you know, back in the 50s or 60s, or whenever the censor board
[Amit Varma]: was founded, one of the reasons for having much harsher restrictions on cinema, as opposed
[Amit Varma]: to say books, was that, you know, cinema influences naive people in all these deep ways.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, we must, you know, protect them that whole paternalism came from there.
[Amit Varma]: And thankfully, that, you know, books were not subject to the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: But let's take a quick commercial break, there is so much to talk about that we'll, I feel
[Amit Varma]: like we'll need another three hours.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive some games.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win win proposition
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to Indian colors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian colors licenses images of fine art from some of the best contemporary artists
[Amit Varma]: in India, and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches and home decor
[Amit Varma]: items.
[Amit Varma]: You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices.
[Amit Varma]: And artists get royalties for every product you buy, win win game.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian colors new ranges in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women
[Amit Varma]: and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta, Manisha
[Amit Varma]: Gherabaswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra, and Jaydeep Mehrotra.
[Amit Varma]: Stay home, but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can show them
[Amit Varma]: you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian colors.
[Amit Varma]: Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to Indian colors.com.
[Amit Varma]: There's colors with an OU and make art a part of your life.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: Unseen for 15% off at Indian colors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Jai Arjun Singh about films, books, writing, all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about something that we've in fact discussed in the past, because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one of the realizations I came to early on, and in a sense, I went through a similar journey
[Amit Varma]: to yours where, as a kid, I used to look down a little bit on Bollywood, partly because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, my father was director of the FDII between 86 and 91.
[Amit Varma]: So I grew up at home just watching world cinema all the time.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't even know that these were like kind of two separate things.
[Amit Varma]: I just didn't think of it that way.
[Amit Varma]: So it was a question of taste, that I liked a certain kind of cinema much more than the
[Amit Varma]: other.
[Amit Varma]: And as a young kid, I looked down on one of them as well.
[Amit Varma]: Now, as one grows older, obviously, I wouldn't say that I'm a full fledged mainstream Hindi
[Amit Varma]: film lover that I am not.
[Amit Varma]: But I do recognize that it is a category error in my view, and we'll discuss this and we've
[Amit Varma]: spoken about this, that I sort of came to the recognition at one point in time that
[Amit Varma]: it's a category error to judge a Hindi film as it were by the same parameters by which
[Amit Varma]: I look at a Western film, because they're so completely different, they're trying to
[Amit Varma]: do completely different things.
[Amit Varma]: They're almost different art forms.
[Amit Varma]: So one has to sort of just shift one's frame of reference to enjoy one over the other.
[Amit Varma]: Now, there's an interesting quote by you, which again, I'll read out, where you indicate
[Amit Varma]: that this is a bit of a false dichotomy.
[Amit Varma]: And here's what you say, quote, I don't want to make a facile comparison that goes Hindi
[Amit Varma]: cinema is equal to loud melodrama, European cinema is equal to understated realism.
[Amit Varma]: It's much more complex than that.
[Amit Varma]: Each of these forms has many modes of expression, and cultures and behaviors around the world
[Amit Varma]: are far from homogenous.
[Amit Varma]: An Indian film that depicted the melodramatic behavior of someone like my grandmother, or
[Amit Varma]: many other similar people I knew, could be realistic and truthful.
[Amit Varma]: But many viewers, even Indian viewers who know this culture well, might instinctively
[Amit Varma]: denounce it as over the top.
[Amit Varma]: And much of European cinema, some Italian genres, for example, is loud, goofy or hyper
[Amit Varma]: dramatic in ways that are comparable to the mainstream Hindi film, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this point about Italian films is great, because one of my favorite directors growing
[Amit Varma]: up was Fellini.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the Fellini films that I really loved, which critics don't talk about in the
[Amit Varma]: canon, but I really loved it is a film called Amar Kaur, you know, which has all these sort
[Amit Varma]: of Italian families behaving in really boisterous, dramatic ways.
[Amit Varma]: And Italians in many ways are like, Italians seem to me to be the European Bengalis in
[Amit Varma]: some of the melodrama and extreme emotion.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, one of my favorite films of childhood was Fellini's brilliant Eve with
[Amit Varma]: a Lonely, a fantastic coming of age film that spoke so much to me.
[Amit Varma]: But to kind of get back to the subject at hand, that one there is, of course, a difference.
[Amit Varma]: But what you're also pointing out is that there's no strict boundary between the two.
[Amit Varma]: How has your thinking on this evolved over these many years, like I presume that you
[Amit Varma]: shared some of that initial sort of snobbishness and got over it and realized not to make value
[Amit Varma]: judgments at all.
[Amit Varma]: But how does one look at it?
[Amit Varma]: Do you have to sort of court shift, so to say, when you view one kind of cinema over
[Amit Varma]: the other?
[Amit Varma]: How does it all work for you?
[Guest]: Not at a conscious level.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm sure there must be some sort of mental shift that happens.
[Guest]: But as of now, I don't think it's conscious at all.
[Guest]: I find it quite easy at most times to watch a particular sort of film on one day.
[Guest]: And watch a very different sort of film the next day, without really thinking in terms
[Guest]: of...
[Guest]: And I suppose most people don't really do that.
[Guest]: I mean, how do you consciously make that shift anyway, right?
[Guest]: It's not like I start the film saying, okay, deep breath, count to 10.
[Guest]: This is going to be this sort of film.
[Guest]: It's nothing like that.
[Guest]: I think it's just a question of receiving whatever film it is, and then seeing if that
[Guest]: individual film works for you or not.
[Guest]: And then, of course, if you're doing this professionally, and you have to write a piece
[Guest]: about it, then the big thing you have to do is to articulate as well as possible, why
[Guest]: it worked for you, or why it didn't work for you.
[Guest]: And in the process of that articulation also, I don't usually feel the need to put down
[Guest]: things like, as you mentioned, I do tend to be defensive in many ways, and some of that
[Guest]: defensiveness does occasionally come into my writing when I'm writing about a really
[Guest]: mainstream Hindi film, which I know, tends to be the subject of snobbery from a lot of
[Guest]: the people around me, that does come in sometimes.
[Guest]: But generally speaking, I'm not really...
[Guest]: Even in my writing, I'm not really trying to describe what the assumptions that you
[Guest]: have to make while watching this particular type of film, or anything like that.
[Guest]: I just take it as a given that there are many different modes of expression, and that there
[Guest]: are so many ways of expressing emotion truthfully, and that truthfulness doesn't have to be synonymous
[Guest]: with understatement, for instance, to take a really obvious example.
[Guest]: You asked something else before this, right?
[Guest]: I've gone off on a tangent again, as I do.
[Amit Varma]: No, it was sort of about your thinking about this dichotomy, and just to kind of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: double click again, as a film critic, like you said, when you're writing about it, it
[Amit Varma]: seems to me that there is a certain dissonance, and I'm just thinking aloud, a certain dissonance
[Amit Varma]: in this in writing about a particular kind of film and another kind of film, where the
[Amit Varma]: reader would probably expect you to have a similar sense of use a similar bunch of parameters
[Amit Varma]: or metrics to talk about these films, and actually, you cannot do that.
[Amit Varma]: Like when you talk about a film like Moonlight, for example, right, which I loved so much,
[Amit Varma]: I thought it's the best film to win a Best Film Oscar when it did just such a great moving
[Amit Varma]: film and very understated as well.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: Now, if within Moonlight, there was any moment where that understatement breaks, and when
[Amit Varma]: a character says what he is feeling, it would be a tremendous false note, it would it would
[Amit Varma]: just mar the sort of the unity of the film and what held it together.
[Amit Varma]: But so you know, that would become a parameter for that film.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, if you're watching a Hindi film, that kind of expression, almost
[Amit Varma]: a spoon feeding of the audience as it were, would almost be routine and not thought of
[Amit Varma]: as something that is a problem.
[Amit Varma]: And at some level, of course, it is how unified is the voice of the film, that that film has
[Amit Varma]: chosen one particular voice in this film might have chosen another particular voice.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, it is almost as if we look at these two different kinds of cinema
[Amit Varma]: through a different set of values, like I love David Dhawan films, okay, you can judge
[Amit Varma]: me for it in these times as well.
[Amit Varma]: So I love David Dhawan films, but I also love Kieslowski.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is a set of values through which I look at those films and the expectations
[Amit Varma]: I have are completely different and of course, multitudes and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But I guess you could say that the reader also takes that for granted.
[Amit Varma]: So you can't need to spell any of it out or just for it.
[Guest]: No, no, what I'm really saying is, I suppose is that there isn't a particular way in which
[Guest]: I experienced that shift, while, you know, moving from one type of film to another.
[Guest]: I don't know what that means.
[Guest]: I don't know what that says about me or my brain or whatever it is.
[Guest]: But but but but I, and also, since you bring up moonlight, but there's one little point
[Guest]: which which I think is, you know, might also go some way to might also be a reminder that
[Guest]: there are so many different ways of loving the same film, right?
[Guest]: And I know you love Moonlight.
[Guest]: I loved it as well.
[Guest]: I saw it on in the hall, but but some of the scenes that worked best for me in that film,
[Guest]: I actually thought that the background music was, was, was very lush, almost.
[Guest]: I don't know, you you probably didn't feel that way.
[Guest]: I felt it was insistent in a very good way.
[Guest]: I know it served as a sort of I wouldn't use a term like spoon feeding, but but it served
[Guest]: as some sort of an emotional cue for me, especially in some of the dialogue less scenes like the
[Guest]: one where the protagonist as you know, the one in the swimming pool, for instance, seems
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: I felt like my experience of the film was actually enhanced by the use of music, which
[Guest]: which I didn't think of as particularly subtle music.
[Guest]: I thought of it as cue providing in a way.
[Guest]: Now I'm going to assume that you didn't feel the same way at all, even though you love
[Guest]: the film as well.
[Amit Varma]: So I you know, I have to say that I didn't notice it at all.
[Amit Varma]: So number one, the fact that I didn't notice it is a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: It means that it didn't draw attention to itself and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And secondly, I think like I told you, I think some of my views on this have changed slightly
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that I now realize that all of cinema, every choice you make is in a sense
[Amit Varma]: manipulating the viewer, whether it is to have a particular kind of music or to not
[Amit Varma]: have that music.
[Amit Varma]: So I am a little more open to these sort of things than I used to be once, where once
[Amit Varma]: I was like, no, I don't want to be manipulated.
[Amit Varma]: If there is a sad scene, do not play sad violin music, you know, do not play Chennai at this
[Amit Varma]: time.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, in an action scene, you don't need to play action music, just let it happen.
[Amit Varma]: Now I'm a little more relaxed.
[Amit Varma]: I understand that in any case, it's a curated experience.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, unless something is jarring and is detracting from that experience, let me
[Amit Varma]: just sit back and enjoy the experience without sort of deconstructing it too much.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm sorry.
[Guest]: Continue.
[Guest]: No, that's pretty much all I had to say.
[Guest]: It was just, you know, that just a reminder, and there's something that, you know, when
[Guest]: you're thinking in this nerdish way about not just about films, but also about the nuts
[Guest]: and bolts of film appreciation, film criticism, you do think about these things about how,
[Guest]: you know, you and I can go together in a post-COVID world, we can go into go into a hall together
[Guest]: and watch a film together, come out gushing about it saying, dude, that was that was great.
[Guest]: It was such a great film.
[Guest]: And then we go and sit down and have coffee somewhere and start talking about the film.
[Guest]: And then we realized that we liked completely different things in the film.
[Guest]: And that maybe we disagreed about something very important, you know, the quality of a
[Guest]: particular performance, maybe, maybe I thought the performance was the best thing in the
[Guest]: film and made the film for me.
[Guest]: You had reservations about the performance, but it wasn't anything like a deal breaker
[Guest]: for you.
[Guest]: So everything else in the film more than made up for it.
[Guest]: So at the end of that coffee, we've actually discovered that we've had very different experiences
[Guest]: of the film.
[Guest]: But for each of us, it is a five star film.
[Guest]: So just a little thing that, you know, that these are some of the conversations that come
[Guest]: up the few occasions that I talk about these things with other movie lovers or with other
[Guest]: professional film critics, that there's so many ways, it's very reductive to think that,
[Guest]: oh, you know, person A and person B both love the same film, so their tastes match.
[Guest]: It's not, it's not necessarily the case, it's that there's so many different ways of liking
[Guest]: or not liking or being indifferent to a film, or a book or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And this leads me to a further thought about the discourse, right?
[Amit Varma]: If this was to happen, let's say post COVID times, you can go watch a movie together.
[Amit Varma]: What would be that conversation we would have about the film would further enrich the experience
[Amit Varma]: of the film if we are receptive and listening to each other?
[Amit Varma]: Because and you can see the film from my eyes later, and I can go back and I'll probably
[Amit Varma]: whenever I watch Moonlight again, I'll, you know, I'll be more sort of mindful of these
[Amit Varma]: things that you speak about.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that in much of our discourse, we don't have that receptiveness anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Much of our discourse is where you take a hardened position, that this is what I feel
[Amit Varma]: and everyone else who disagrees with me has a character flaw that they are stupid or they
[Amit Varma]: are evil or they are whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And so much of our discourse has become like that a little less on cinema.
[Amit Varma]: But even on cinema, as you pointed out, you've written in the past about, you know, when
[Amit Varma]: you would write a bad review of something, somebody else would say, how could you not
[Amit Varma]: like that?
[Amit Varma]: You know, you weren't being objective, whereas you pointed out objective means, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you should agree with me.
[Amit Varma]: So just a kind of a point about the discourse, one of the ways in which you see these two
[Amit Varma]: words colliding these two, almost these different philosophies, and I'll still speak of it in
[Amit Varma]: dichotomous terms.
[Amit Varma]: Although I buy your point that there's an intermingling, is say in a film like Piku.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you've mentioned Piku in the past in the context of acting where some people, you
[Amit Varma]: know, appreciated Deepika's, quote unquote, understated performance there and you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that no, she's been good in so many other films.
[Amit Varma]: But it is only you know, why are we applying this particular lens or this particular value
[Amit Varma]: and saying she's good in this.
[Amit Varma]: But I also thought of Piku as showcasing these two forms coming together in terms of the
[Amit Varma]: way Amitabh and Irrfan acted, where I thought Irrfan was sadly, just an incredibly great
[Amit Varma]: actor by any standard.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, while Amitabh, like in that film, I thought Irrfan's acting was superb
[Amit Varma]: and Amitabh was just hamming it up.
[Amit Varma]: And it was classic Bollywood and you have made these categories of actor and star actor.
[Amit Varma]: And he's basically just been a star actor all the way through and he's been extremely
[Amit Varma]: good.
[Amit Varma]: So no value judgment there, per se.
[Amit Varma]: But you sort of see these two different schools of acting come together where Irrfan is just
[Amit Varma]: living, breathing the character.
[Amit Varma]: And Amitabh is just hamming, it's just, you know, not good acting in my book.
[Amit Varma]: But that is, of course, through, you know, my sort of biased lens, Amitabh in his own
[Amit Varma]: context, he's a great, great actor that hardly needs to be elaborated upon.
[Guest]: Can I interrupt for a second?
[Guest]: Yeah, sure.
[Guest]: Probably make a habit of just riffing on what the other is saying.
[Guest]: I actually wrote another piece once, which you probably haven't read, explaining why
[Guest]: I was very moved by Bachchan's performance in Pico.
[Guest]: And in fact, I've spoken about this also recently in a class because I, you know, most of the
[Guest]: people I know, which of course says something about the circles, again, that I tend to associate
[Guest]: with, share your view of the Bachchan performance as being an exercise in hamming.
[Guest]: And of course, a lot of these people, a lot of the people who hold this view also happen
[Guest]: to be Bengalis, who think that this is a stereotypical depiction of the Bengali.
[Guest]: Now, of course, I, at risk of being very politically incorrect here, I have to say that speaking
[Guest]: as a North Indian who has experienced a lot of real world Bengalis as stereotypes, I had
[Guest]: no trouble at all buying into Bachchan's performance.
[Guest]: And I think perhaps, you know, a lot of defensive Bengalis are perhaps not the best people to
[Guest]: be making that judgment.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I'm half wrong, but that is not my criticism at all.
[Guest]: I don't care about that.
[Guest]: I'm not saying it is.
[Guest]: But yeah, there are many others who most people I know, in fact, in the, in the, you know,
[Guest]: the film writers world, the writers world, even if they didn't really, even if they weren't
[Guest]: bold enough to say it in their reviews, thought Bachchan was not very good in the film, hamming
[Guest]: etc, etc.
[Guest]: But this actually leads me to a talking point that might be relevant to something that we
[Guest]: were discussing earlier as well about how our personal experiences often illuminate
[Guest]: or help us make sense of certain things or infect how we receive films or performances.
[Guest]: The reason why Bachchan's performance really worked for me, and, in fact, just sort of,
[Guest]: you know, moved me in a way that I just, you know, again, had a hard time articulating
[Guest]: was because there were these little moments in the performance and I'm not even talking
[Guest]: about the performance in its entirety, but there were these little moments in the performance
[Guest]: that speaking as someone who has spent a lot of time, either caregiving himself in the
[Guest]: last few years, or witnessing caregiving in the context of my nanny's final battle with
[Guest]: cancer and my mother looking after her and my mother who's also a very introverted person
[Guest]: just putting her life on hold and, and having to deal with this parent who was a completely
[Guest]: different personality type, who wanted to bully her daughter, but was also very scared
[Guest]: about her condition and I knew that she was dependent on her daughter.
[Guest]: So you have that combination of wanting to exercise hegemony as this very extroverted,
[Guest]: you know, boisterous person, but also being very scared and nervous, that I shouldn't
[Guest]: say something that will get Mala upset, Mala is my mother, and I saw this look in my nanny's
[Guest]: eyes so often, you know, in 2007, 2008, 2009, when the cancer period was going on.
[Guest]: And I saw exactly that same look, you know, in some scenes in Piku where, where Deepika
[Guest]: just sort of loses it, where the Bachchan character is being, you know, he's being difficult
[Guest]: and, and the daughter loses it and she starts shouting at him or just sort of say something.
[Guest]: And then you know, there's you either see him in, in, in a direct shot or in as part
[Guest]: of a larger scene, the way he's looking at her, just, you know, it just felt so truthful
[Guest]: to me, it just reminded me exactly of, of that, of that look in my nanny's eyes, looking
[Guest]: at my mother, and I just felt like this, this guy's captured something about, about this
[Guest]: personality type being in this situation being, being looked after by a child, and, and, and
[Guest]: becoming the child who is being looked after by his child.
[Guest]: So it worked for me, purely in that at that level, I mean, I mean, I'm absolutely fine
[Guest]: with with people saying that the performance felt hammy or whatever.
[Guest]: And, and of course, you know, there are so many different ways of judging these things,
[Guest]: your feelings about a performance will also be again, I'm not talking about you, but but
[Guest]: some other people's feelings about the performance might be affected by the fact that he won
[Guest]: a national award for it.
[Guest]: He was given a national award for it.
[Guest]: So then people will look at the film with that level of expectation.
[Guest]: And then they'll say, listen, Irrfan is so much better, and he's, you know, it's such
[Guest]: a natural, you know, you barely register that he's acting.
[Guest]: And here's this old man who's just hamming it up in every scene, and he got a national
[Guest]: award for hamming.
[Guest]: So people will, will also look at it from that point of view.
[Guest]: But I had a very personal response to the performance.
[Guest]: And I enjoyed it for that reason.
[Amit Varma]: This is kind of fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: If I ever come across Piku running anywhere on TV, because I don't think I'll go out of
[Amit Varma]: my way to watch it, but if I come across it running anywhere, I will watch out for this
[Amit Varma]: no seriously with an open mind.
[Amit Varma]: There's this delightful quote in one of your pieces, in fact, which I linked from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes where you quote Subhash Ghai, when he's asked about, you know, Meryl Streep and Susan
[Amit Varma]: Sarandon, do we have actresses like that in India?
[Amit Varma]: And he said, quote, can they dance as convincingly as Madhuri Dixit does?
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote, which is, of course, a lovely way of looking at it.
[Amit Varma]: But let's let's kind of now go back to talking about the personal journey and and let's sort
[Amit Varma]: of come to blogging, like one of the reasons blogging was significant for me as a writer,
[Amit Varma]: it was significant in various ways.
[Amit Varma]: But like you, I had a conventional journalism job where I wrote conventional pieces in conventional
[Amit Varma]: formats and blogging was different because of all the, you know, standard reasons you
[Amit Varma]: and I know that number one, you are not restricted by format, you can do 80 words or 8000 words,
[Amit Varma]: you don't have to do 800, you're not restricted by, say, the news cycle, you don't have to
[Amit Varma]: write about what is topical, you can write about anything, you're not constrained by
[Amit Varma]: house style.
[Amit Varma]: And in a certain sense, you aren't constrained by anxiety as well, because, you know, one
[Amit Varma]: of the things that often stops writers or gets in the way is their anxiety of what other
[Amit Varma]: people think of them.
[Amit Varma]: My approach initially as a blogger was I'm just blogging, who gives a who's gonna read
[Amit Varma]: it, you know, and you get into that groove where that self consciousness kind of goes.
[Amit Varma]: And all of these together came to being something liberating.
[Amit Varma]: And in my newsletter, I had an essay about this, about form and content.
[Amit Varma]: And also in the context of, you know, the podcast, where my postulation is that doing
[Amit Varma]: a three hour podcast, as opposed to a 10 minute podcast means I'm having a completely different
[Amit Varma]: kind of conversation, I have to delve that much deeper, I have to do that much more research,
[Amit Varma]: I have to respect the guest that much more, I have to be that much more patient, I have
[Amit Varma]: to listen, genuinely listen that much more.
[Amit Varma]: And all of this affects who I am as a person and changes me in subtle ways, especially
[Amit Varma]: if I'm doing it for a period of years.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, in blogging, I think it shaped my writing because throwing away all these
[Amit Varma]: restrictions and not having to write to the expectations of an editor, or an audience
[Amit Varma]: just allowed me to branch out in all kinds of different directions and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that at the end of that period, when like I wrote 8000 posts over five years,
[Amit Varma]: I would do five posts a day, as you know, on average, I think my record was 18 posts
[Amit Varma]: in a day.
[Amit Varma]: So I was, you know, great writing gym for me getting a lot of writing done without realizing
[Amit Varma]: it or thinking of it that way.
[Amit Varma]: But I do feel that it kind of, it changed the work I did, it changed, therefore it changed
[Amit Varma]: the way I thought, because the imperatives were different, and it changed the person
[Amit Varma]: I am.
[Amit Varma]: Like I genuinely think that, if anything, and this is, of course, in a relative sense,
[Amit Varma]: but the podcast has made me a better person, because I listen more, and I'm more open,
[Amit Varma]: and I'm more sort of whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So what did blogging mean to you in that sense?
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, this is only in hindsight at the time one never knows, but how did it shape
[Amit Varma]: you?
[Amit Varma]: How did it shape your writing?
[Amit Varma]: How did it shape the way you looked at cinema?
[Amit Varma]: Because before this cinema in our newspapers was cheso word ka review, you have to talk
[Amit Varma]: about plot, you have to give a verdict, you have to give a star rating, and that's it.
[Amit Varma]: But now suddenly, you're writing personal essays, you're writing stray observations.
[Amit Varma]: What was it like?
[Guest]: No, well, first of all, you're being very kind when you say 600 words in mainstream
[Guest]: publications, it was closer to 300 or 400.
[Guest]: I had worked for an India Today tabloid in my first job in journalism, and, and I of
[Guest]: course, that was a very small 16 page publication.
[Guest]: But the reviews, I would do book reviews or film reviews were never more than 350-400
[Guest]: words.
[Guest]: It was far from the ideal way of doing it, but when you're that young, you will have
[Guest]: a boss coming up to you in the middle of the many other things you have to do in a day,
[Guest]: and just sort of tossing a book at you and saying, yeah, it is a 400 page book, and saying
[Guest]: iska kal review de dena, give the review by tomorrow.
[Guest]: And that, of course, just just tells you the first message that gives you as a young journalist
[Guest]: is that reviewing is not taken seriously, it's not something to be taken seriously is
[Guest]: not considered a form in its own right, it's not considered something that can be good
[Guest]: writing or good thinking in its own right, it's just something that you just do, anybody
[Guest]: can do it.
[Guest]: What's important anyway, is the star rating that you go with your piece, because that's
[Guest]: what the vast majority of readers, including my mother, by the way, would look at, even
[Guest]: after after I was writing as, even after I started doing film pieces myself, my mother
[Guest]: would still be looking at the Times of India piece to see what the star rating was.
[Guest]: So of course, working purely for mainstream publications as a journalist at that time,
[Guest]: and possibly even at this time, at the current time, just meant that you're not, you don't
[Guest]: have the tools to take yourself very seriously as a reviewer, or as a critic, or to think
[Guest]: of it as something that requires rigor, or think of a review as something that can be
[Guest]: well written, well articulated, that can be a personal thing.
[Guest]: And of course, pretty much everything you said about blogging applies to me too, except
[Guest]: that I might, I don't know if it would be completely truthful to say that I didn't feel
[Guest]: any peer pressure at all, or any burden of expectations, because I think the time probably
[Guest]: did arrive.
[Guest]: I can't really think of any specific cases just now, but a point did arrive when after
[Guest]: the blog became widely read, you know, during that, that heady period of 2004, 2005, 2006,
[Guest]: before social media had come along before there was all this clutter on the internet,
[Guest]: and blogs were still being read quite widely.
[Guest]: And, and as you might know, one of the reasons why it became possible for me to become a
[Guest]: freelance writer and an independent writer working from home, working for multiple publications
[Guest]: was because I was getting job offers from other publications based purely on the blog
[Guest]: writing, not on my writing in Business Standard where I was working at the time.
[Guest]: So it was a very heady time and once you became aware that senior editors and different publications
[Guest]: know Jabberwock, know your blog Jabberwock, and obviously somewhere you start becoming
[Guest]: a little self conscious.
[Guest]: I think that did happen to me somewhere, I became a little nervous as well.
[Guest]: But I don't think it happened to a great degree.
[Guest]: I don't think it happened, it happened to a crippling degree where the writing became
[Guest]: a chore or became more difficult to pull off.
[Guest]: And ultimately, of course, what happened was that to more directly answer your question,
[Guest]: what it did for me, in addition to what you said yourself about just giving you a space
[Guest]: where you could write an 80,000 word piece if you wanted to hypothetically, or definitely
[Guest]: a 1500 word, 2000 word piece on a particular aspect of a book or a film, rather than a
[Guest]: holistic review, or a holistic structured review of the book or the film, just something
[Guest]: whimsical, but detailed at the same time, obviously, that the blogging format did that
[Guest]: for me.
[Guest]: But also what it did was because at the time, like I said, I was working for Business Standard
[Guest]: newspaper, I had started doing a few book reviews for them for the edit page.
[Guest]: But mostly what I was doing at that time was still this very corporate writing, I was doing
[Guest]: these corporate stories on the watch industry, on the jewelry industry, whatever stuff that
[Guest]: I wasn't genuinely interested in.
[Guest]: And because prior to that, the only film reviews or the only book reviews I had written were
[Guest]: for that tabloid that I mentioned 300 word spaces, 400 word spaces, I perhaps lacked
[Guest]: the confidence that I could do this, you know, in a in a proper consolidated way in the long
[Guest]: format.
[Guest]: And what the blog did for me was especially when when the blog post started getting a
[Guest]: good response, was that it told me that, yes, I could write a 1500 word piece about a film
[Guest]: or a film essay that was appreciated by other people.
[Guest]: And that therefore my sensibility, you know, struck a chord for other people.
[Guest]: It told me that and that gave me the confidence that I needed to ultimately go on and write
[Guest]: longer pieces for official publication.
[Guest]: You if you remember, a little more than 10 years ago, you gave me a column space for
[Guest]: Yahoo, which again, a lot, you know, what was the sort of space where I could write
[Guest]: longish pieces.
[Guest]: Now, again, without the blog having happened a few years before that, I might not have
[Guest]: had the confidence to to write officially published pieces for payment for writers like
[Guest]: Amit Verma and Prem Panekar, who I admired, that I might not have had that confidence
[Guest]: without the validation provided by the blog.
[Guest]: So that's really it.
[Guest]: I think, you know, finding one's voice, feeling like it was sustainable to to write
[Guest]: longish pieces about cinema or literature or whatever, and that it would make some sense
[Guest]: to someone.
[Guest]: That's what it was about.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, for my listeners, I used to be a consulting editor at Yahoo briefly, I basically put together
[Amit Varma]: and ran a column section for them, which included columns by among other people, Jai Arjun Singh.
[Amit Varma]: And I think you used to alternate with Sanjay Sipahi Malani on books, another sort of fantastic
[Amit Varma]: writer, the two of you were my sort of art and culture people.
[Amit Varma]: And we had others for politics and society and this and that.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm going back to, you know, the similar process that happened to you where you said
[Amit Varma]: that people started taking your film writing seriously because of the blog.
[Amit Varma]: And a similar process happened with me in the sense that look, I was I used to work
[Amit Varma]: at Cricket Info, I used to write in cricket.
[Amit Varma]: But because of the blog where I wrote about everything, I got that column in Mint for
[Amit Varma]: which I won the Bastia Prize, I used to write regularly for the Wall Street Journal back
[Amit Varma]: in the day.
[Amit Varma]: So everything kind of came from there, though none of that was intended.
[Amit Varma]: And the happiest writing I did was actually for the blog itself, because absolutely no
[Amit Varma]: limitations and the other way in which it helped me and which is why I advise people
[Amit Varma]: today to start a blog or a newsletter because blogs are kind of dead.
[Amit Varma]: But something is is that you're writing regularly that iteration matters, you're writing repeatedly,
[Amit Varma]: hopefully without self-consciousness, and that iteration just matters, not just in making
[Amit Varma]: you a better writer and polishing the craft, but also it kind of makes you a better thinker.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my next question is this that at this time, you're writing about films.
[Amit Varma]: And one aspect of writing about films that we discussed is that it makes you look deeper
[Amit Varma]: at films, that you no longer have that intuitive or that initial or that visceral reaction
[Amit Varma]: to a film, you actually have to think about it, figure out what you want to write about
[Amit Varma]: it, go deeper into that aspect of yourself and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But it strikes me that there's another danger and the danger is taking this too far of looking
[Amit Varma]: for significance where there is none, because you have to have something to write about
[Amit Varma]: almost a risk of over analysis, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And in your self deprecatory way, you've pointed out one example of this in the past, I think
[Amit Varma]: in a TEDx talk you gave, where you spoke about the scene from Jaane Bhi Do Yaaro, you know,
[Amit Varma]: where everybody is sort of silhouetted, they go up this building and they're silhouetted
[Amit Varma]: and in the sky and, you know, these guys are just silhouettes.
[Amit Varma]: And you spoke about how this sort of seemed to be symbolic of their Kale Karname.
[Amit Varma]: But when you mentioned it to Kundan Shah, the director, he said, Oh, Jai, you're being
[Amit Varma]: a critic again.
[Amit Varma]: Aisa kuch nahi hai.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and I'm reminded about this, and I try to watch out for it in myself when I
[Amit Varma]: write about books or films.
[Amit Varma]: Because critics do tend to do this, like I remember one of my favorite films as a kid
[Amit Varma]: growing up, because I saw it at that age when it is likely to appeal to people of that age
[Amit Varma]: was the Peter Weir film, Dead Poets Society.
[Amit Varma]: And a couple of years later, my dad got one of these foreign film magazines where I read
[Amit Varma]: someone talking about Dead Poets Society, about having all these homoerotic overtones
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, which I was completely sure is just way over interpreting what it actually
[Amit Varma]: was, you know, reading far more into a story than you need to.
[Amit Varma]: So is this something that you felt that you had to watch out for?
[Amit Varma]: Do you think you ever crossed the line?
[Amit Varma]: You know, would you know when you cross the line, because at some level, obviously, everything
[Amit Varma]: is subjective.
[Amit Varma]: And you can only speak about how the film affects you and what it means to you.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, there is a risk of kind of going too far reading into the film things
[Amit Varma]: that the director never intended or just weren't there just because you know, that's a fascinating
[Amit Varma]: narrative for you.
[Amit Varma]: So is this something you've thought about?
[Amit Varma]: Do you look back on some of the earlier stuff you've done and say that, hey, no, no, that
[Amit Varma]: was that that was wrong?
[Amit Varma]: Or, you know, I overthought that?
[Guest]: You know, the short answer to that would be no, I don't.
[Guest]: And I have to say this, what the director in consciously intended or what a novelist
[Guest]: consciously intended, you know, should be completely irrelevant to a good critic anyway.
[Guest]: It's not something that I mean, I'm firmly with again, come to another cliche, but, but
[Guest]: I, you know, firmly believe in D. H. Lawrence's dictum about trusting the artist, trusting
[Guest]: the tale.
[Guest]: Now, the thing is, that example you provided, wo jaane bhi toh yaaro by the way, there was
[Guest]: actually a follow up to it, which I think maybe maybe you don't know about, or maybe
[Guest]: I don't remember if I put it, it may not have been in the book, but but I think I may have
[Guest]: written it elsewhere.
[Guest]: When I spoke with Dinodh Pradhan, the DOP of the film, later, may even have been after
[Guest]: I did the book, or I can't remember the exact sequence of events.
[Guest]: He actually told me that, you know, though, of course, the fact that the scene was shot
[Guest]: in that particular way, that silhouetted way, where the four villains, the four conspirators
[Guest]: are, you see them in the shadowy sort of way, the fact that it was done was was first and
[Guest]: foremost, because they had run out of time, and they only had that had the top of that
[Guest]: building for for a certain amount of time.
[Guest]: But Dinodh Pradhan also said that, you know, but but you know, when we found ourselves
[Guest]: with this constraint, I went up to Kundan and said, listen, but you know, this would
[Guest]: actually make for for quite a nice atmospheric shot, given, given the black deeds that are
[Guest]: being, you know, being being discussed out here.
[Guest]: And you know, I did sort of, and he said this, Dinodh said this independently of my having
[Guest]: brought up anything in terms of interpretation.
[Guest]: So that is one thing.
[Guest]: Having said that, even if he hadn't said it, even if Dinodh Pradhan hadn't provided this
[Guest]: counter narrative to what Kundan provided, and I should also specify that Kundan himself,
[Guest]: though he he was very snarky with me at various times, snarky in a nice way, in a way that
[Guest]: a creative person often is with with an impudent young critic who is who is trying to read
[Guest]: a lot of things and do his work, because creative people do tend to feel be very proprietary
[Guest]: about what they have done, they tend to feel like, they need to have full control over
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And therefore, other other other interpretations that they did not consciously intend are a
[Guest]: problem.
[Guest]: Everything should just be there many, many creative people are like that.
[Guest]: Even Kundan, in a more relaxed frame of mind did subsequently say to me, yeah, but you
[Guest]: know, listen, it's as a critic, it is your job to find your interpretations and to look
[Guest]: at what is there in the frame.
[Guest]: Kundan had after all, been at FTII himself as a student, and he would have would have
[Guest]: picked up on that, you know, watching hundreds and hundreds of films, and we've been taught
[Guest]: to think about them in personal ways.
[Guest]: So yeah, so my basic position is, if there is one, is that there is no such thing as
[Guest]: over analysis, subtextual analysis is great.
[Guest]: Of course, it's not that simple, because of course, you know, when we're talking about
[Guest]: over analysis, we are still talking about engaging with what is in the frame of the
[Guest]: film, if you're talking about a particular scene, or whatever you look at what is in
[Guest]: the frame, or in the case of a novel, you look at what is on the page, the words that
[Guest]: have been used there.
[Guest]: Now, if I were to, hypothetically, I were to watch a film, where you know, just say
[Guest]: a Hindi film, where a villain played by Ajit in one of those impossibly opulent villain's
[Guest]: lairs with pink sofas and a pool with a shark swimming in it, waiting to chew up heroes.
[Guest]: If I were to write about that scene and say, you know, what's happening here is Ajit isn't
[Guest]: a bad guy.
[Guest]: But there's an invisible pink unicorn sitting on that pink sofa.
[Guest]: And he is wired into Ajit and he is making Ajit do all these bad things.
[Guest]: And of course, you can't see most people can't see the unicorn because he's invisible and
[Guest]: also because he's, he's a little less pink than that bright thing so far.
[Guest]: But that is it, that's, you know, the real thing that's happening here is that the unicorn
[Guest]: is making Ajit do all these bad things.
[Guest]: Now, if I were to say that, it might still be a fairly entertaining take on the film,
[Guest]: it might even sort of be a way of overlaying fiction on an existing palimpsest.
[Guest]: But it probably wouldn't be good criticism, right?
[Guest]: I think it's safe to say that it wouldn't be valid criticism because you know, you're
[Guest]: dealing with something that is not palpably in the frame.
[Guest]: But once you're dealing with things that are actually there, you know, and at whatever
[Guest]: level because the film is made up of so many different choices, some of which could be
[Guest]: unconscious choices or subconscious choices or the result of different departments working
[Guest]: together collaborating, you can have a scene where an actor is doing a particular thing,
[Guest]: there's a line of dialogue, there's something happening at the level of the of the costume
[Guest]: design, something happening at the level of the set design, camera movement, shot composition,
[Guest]: whatever.
[Guest]: Now, when you're looking at all of that in its entirety, of course, it's fair game for
[Guest]: a critic to talk about that and to, you know, maybe related to something else that has happened
[Guest]: in the same film, or something else that has happened in a different work made by the same
[Guest]: director, or something like that.
[Guest]: It's, it's completely fair game.
[Guest]: I don't think it's, as long as you can justify your, you know, whatever you've interpreted,
[Guest]: in accordance with what is actually there in the scene, after that, it's not to my mind,
[Guest]: it's not particularly interesting or relevant, what the what the filmmaker himself was consciously
[Guest]: trying to do.
[Guest]: I don't think that is something that the critic needs to be concerned with at all.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's, it's, I both kind of agree and disagree, I agree with your basic point.
[Amit Varma]: But I can see that sometimes overthinking it can become a bad thing.
[Amit Varma]: For example, let's take the pink sofa.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I think the pink unicorn is a bit much because you're adding a plot element and all
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: But one way that scene could be interpreted is that a young critic today could interpret
[Amit Varma]: it and say that, look, what Ajit is actually doing is that with the pinkness of the sofa,
[Amit Varma]: by choosing a pink sofa, he's expressing his his repressed feminine side, it's actually
[Amit Varma]: a little bit metrosexual that he's got a pink sofa.
[Amit Varma]: And all these heroes who are coming to rescue the heroine, by the act of trying to rescue
[Amit Varma]: a woman, they are expressing a paternalism and a patriarchal bent of mind and he's feeding
[Amit Varma]: that toxic masculinity to the sharks in the pool.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: Now, all of this is coherent, but it's clearly nonsense.
[Guest]: Amit, you have a career as an academic critic.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but the thing is, here is where the director's intent does matter, because none
[Amit Varma]: of this is intended.
[Amit Varma]: All of this is coherent.
[Guest]: That's a point very well made.
[Guest]: Having said that, I think the safe thing to do is to say that we are all going to be making
[Guest]: our own value judgments about where the point lies where you perhaps go overboard with analysis
[Guest]: and interpretation.
[Guest]: That's a very good example that you just came up with on the fly like that.
[Guest]: But I also feel like I have read, particularly in the field of academia, and what I would
[Guest]: consider good academia, which is a very tiny minority of the academia I've read, because
[Guest]: much of what I've read, you know, especially when it comes to academia around Hindi cinema
[Guest]: just seems to be tedious above everything else.
[Guest]: But in what I see as the well expressed, serious minded academic writing, I've actually seen
[Guest]: things that are not that far from this deliberately exaggerated example that you provided.
[Guest]: And I've been able to sort of go along with it to some degree.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I don't mean to diss all analysis.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just saying that there is a danger of overthinking and does one watch out for
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, this reminded me of a story about myself and it's fairly self deprecatory
[Amit Varma]: because I end up looking very stupid in it.
[Amit Varma]: So why not share it, which is that when I was in college in my teens, so this would
[Amit Varma]: probably be 91, 92, your seminal year, 91, for example, for all we know.
[Amit Varma]: So I was in Ferguson College in Pune and in our neighbouring college, I think in Gokhale,
[Amit Varma]: there was an art exhibition and Hussain's works were among those that were put up.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't remember the occasion at all or why Hussain's works would be put up in a college
[Amit Varma]: exhibition, but there was something by Hussain there.
[Amit Varma]: And Hussain himself was around gracing the occasion.
[Amit Varma]: So I went there with an acquaintance of mine, my neighbor in the hostel, and we were looking
[Amit Varma]: at a Hussain painting and there was some candle in it.
[Amit Varma]: So my neighbor looked at me and said, you know what that candle is, I think that represents
[Amit Varma]: a hope of humanity.
[Amit Varma]: So I was like, nahi yaar, a great artist like Hussain would never do such cheap symbolism.
[Amit Varma]: So anyway, then Hussain comes near the painting and somebody, you know, thrusts a mic in his
[Amit Varma]: face and says, Sir, can you tell us about this painting?
[Amit Varma]: What is that candle doing there?
[Amit Varma]: And Hussain says, that's meant to represent the hope of humanity, almost identical words.
[Amit Varma]: And I just wanted to sink into the ground ki yeh kya ho gaya, but anyway, to sort of
[Amit Varma]: continue, I'll pick up on one of the things you said, where, and I agree with you in this
[Amit Varma]: particular thing that you said, where you said that you have to look at a piece of art
[Amit Varma]: on its own and divorce it of everything else, just look at it by itself, forget what the
[Amit Varma]: director intended, forget all the things around it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this brings me to that political question almost these days of can you separate art
[Amit Varma]: from the artist, where it is often thought that if, depending on the artist's character,
[Amit Varma]: you should just totally ignore their art, suddenly your value judgments about their
[Amit Varma]: art have to be influenced by things that you find out about their personal life.
[Amit Varma]: So people will use this to, for example, dis Picasso or, you know, not watch Polanski or
[Amit Varma]: Woody Allen's films and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm curious about what you think about this, because my stand to be very clear is
[Amit Varma]: that my judgment of the art and my judgment of the character of the artist are two completely
[Amit Varma]: separate things.
[Amit Varma]: I can love a work of art, and I can absolutely condemn things that the artist might have
[Amit Varma]: done that they stand completely separately, even though at an emotional level, for example,
[Amit Varma]: I would never read something by say, Neruda, once one knows about that early rape he committed
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, you know, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But there are many other cases which are not so clear cut in my mind, like in any case,
[Amit Varma]: I didn't like Neruda's poetry and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But there are cases which are not so clear cut in my mind.
[Amit Varma]: And my point there is that these judgments, the judgment of the art always has to be independent.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if I was to give you a book right now, and it's by an anonymous author, say
[Amit Varma]: a new say, even by Elena Ferrante, are you going to suspend judgment on that work of
[Amit Varma]: art till you know everything about the character of the artist?
[Amit Varma]: That is not even possible.
[Amit Varma]: So what is what is your sort of take on this?
[Guest]: I'm both glad and a little terrified that you asked this question, because it's, you
[Guest]: know, it's one of those things that's so complicated that one isn't sure, you know, one will be
[Guest]: able to articulate all of one's feelings about it in a forum like this.
[Guest]: First, first of all, let me just say, before I say something slightly controversial sounding,
[Guest]: let me say that that I completely understand and empathize with anyone who, depending on
[Guest]: the things on the subjects that resonate most for them, or the things that they feel most
[Guest]: strongly about, are so triggered by, by what Polanski probably did, or what Woody Allen
[Guest]: probably did, or what VS Naipaul or whoever probably probably did, that they just cannot
[Guest]: bring themselves to experience this person's films anymore.
[Guest]: I completely get that.
[Guest]: That is a personal decision.
[Guest]: It's it's it's something that's completely valid.
[Guest]: I might not be triggered by those things.
[Guest]: I might be triggered as somebody who's who's more involved with dogs than with most humans
[Guest]: and homo sapien issues, I, I might get triggered by an artist or filmmaker or a novelist, someone
[Guest]: who I discovered, at some point has has engaged in severe cruelty to an animal.
[Guest]: If I if I hear of of a favorite filmmaker or a favorite novelist, engaging in tremendous
[Guest]: cruelty to an animal, to a dog or something like that, and that might completely put me
[Guest]: off this person's books or films or whatever.
[Guest]: So all of us have different triggers.
[Guest]: And so I completely get that, get that response, even though many people just, many people
[Guest]: I know just make fun of that response, they know that the idea that you can be triggered
[Guest]: enough by what some someone has done to just reject the whole body of work or to stop watching
[Guest]: something or whatever, because, because logically, also, you know, especially when it when it
[Guest]: comes to film, as you implied as well in your, you know, what you were saying, how does one
[Guest]: even, no one is ever going to have full knowledge about these things anyway, right?
[Guest]: A film is a collaborative process, you might have apart from the director or the script
[Guest]: writer, you might have 20 other people who have played a very prominent role in the making
[Guest]: of this film, or the or the making of specific scenes within this film.
[Guest]: And there's a pretty good chance that one or more of those 20 people has done something
[Guest]: ghastly at some point in their lives and got away with it or whatever or not.
[Guest]: So as new information keeps coming in, how do you cancel things with hindsight?
[Guest]: How do you unwatch or unappreciate something that you've already appreciated, you know,
[Guest]: it requires a certain sort of double think, which, which I find very strange.
[Guest]: But when it comes to the broad question of the art and the artist, one thought that I
[Guest]: have, which which I don't really, I feel like I haven't really seen it expressed in most
[Guest]: of the discourse that I've, that I've experienced about this, what happens is that many of the
[Guest]: conversations that that that that begin with, can you separate the art from the artist or
[Guest]: from the person seem to imply that we just have one of two alternatives, you know, one
[Guest]: alternative is, no, you can't, once you know that the artist has done reprehensible things,
[Guest]: you reject the art as unsavory or unpalatable.
[Guest]: The other option is, yes, you can separate the two things, accept the art as something
[Guest]: that exists on its own terms and might have its own merits and continue to denounce the
[Guest]: artist as an essentially bad person.
[Guest]: But the art as something that also just has a life of its own almost independently from
[Guest]: the artist.
[Guest]: Now, for me, these positions seem to carry the buried implication that when an artist
[Guest]: who has done terrible things, creates a book or a film or a song or whatever that is morally
[Guest]: uplifting or empathetic, or shows positive human values, then it means that this artist
[Guest]: was being hypocritical, concealing his real self from his audience.
[Guest]: And I find that view quite problematic, because, you know, the way I see it is, if you were
[Guest]: to ask, if you were to assume that the allegations about Polanski, for instance, are completely
[Guest]: true, child rape, whatever.
[Guest]: And then with that knowledge, you then say, okay, can you separate Polanski, the person
[Guest]: from his films?
[Guest]: My answer to that, first of all, would be no, you cannot separate him from his films,
[Guest]: because his films are deeply personal works.
[Guest]: You know, everything, even when he's adapting a work like Macbeth, he's putting so much
[Guest]: of his own life experience into it.
[Guest]: There are scenes in that which hark back to the Sharon Tate murder.
[Guest]: There is Polanski's personal life and his personality in almost all his work.
[Guest]: It's all there.
[Guest]: How do you separate the two things?
[Guest]: Now does that necessarily mean that we then just cancel all the films?
[Guest]: And my answer to that would be no as well.
[Guest]: Because for me, you know, somebody who's lived a life of 90 years or whatever, again, coming
[Guest]: back to the we all contain multitudes thing, this is something that I know a lot of people
[Guest]: will find this idea problematic.
[Guest]: But you know, if you have one side of your personality that has allowed you to do this
[Guest]: really terrible thing, you might also have other sides of your personality that have
[Guest]: allowed you to honestly create great art, which has all these sensitive things going
[Guest]: on in it.
[Guest]: And why can't you just accept that maybe these two things represent different sides of the
[Guest]: person's personality, and then make your call.
[Guest]: If you decide that, that the bad things he's done are deal breakers for you, then then
[Guest]: of course, you must, you know, never watch a Polanski film again.
[Guest]: But I think the question of can you separate the art from the artist is inherently a reductive
[Guest]: one in some ways.
[Guest]: Because I don't think that question, you know, the you know, whether you answer yes or no,
[Guest]: I think there is a third possibility as well.
[Guest]: There is an in between possibility.
[Amit Varma]: I think that question needs nuance itself.
[Amit Varma]: Because just thinking aloud, I think what we're talking about here is not a separation
[Amit Varma]: of the art from the artist, but a separation of the judgment of the art from a judgment
[Amit Varma]: of the artist, where one can hold that your judgment of an artist can include that behavior,
[Amit Varma]: which is just horrendous, and you can think of him as a moral monster.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, your judgment of a particular work in which he may have put different aspects
[Amit Varma]: of his personality or his art or his craft or whatever, you can still look at that work
[Amit Varma]: and say that it's worth it.
[Amit Varma]: And I agree with you that this is often personal, it depends on what your triggers are.
[Amit Varma]: For example, like I said, I can't read Neruda again, I would not read anything by say, Tarun
[Amit Varma]: Tejpal and M.J.
[Amit Varma]: Akbar.
[Amit Varma]: They're both writers of horrendous purple prose anyway, I don't know if there's a connection
[Amit Varma]: between purple prose and bad character, it is quite possible.
[Amit Varma]: But for example, one person I do feel conflicted about is someone like Louis CK, like before
[Amit Varma]: the MeToo allegations against him, surfaced, he was essentially perhaps my favorite modern
[Amit Varma]: artist, like the TV series he did, Louis, not Lucky Louis, which was an earlier one
[Amit Varma]: and not so good.
[Amit Varma]: But a series he did called Louis, I think is an absolute masterpiece, which just gets
[Amit Varma]: better and better as it goes along through the seasons.
[Amit Varma]: And part of what makes his art great is the self reflectiveness, where he is basically
[Amit Varma]: shitting on his earlier self all the time.
[Amit Varma]: It is like a person has just changed and changed and changed, and he recognizes that he was
[Amit Varma]: once an asshole.
[Amit Varma]: And his whole art is about sort of getting to, you know, the crux of the human experience
[Amit Varma]: through just looking at all the mistakes that he has made.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, what he was accused of was absolute assholery and really bad behavior,
[Amit Varma]: but something that happened in the early 2000s.
[Amit Varma]: So you, you don't know how much he had changed the allegations at one level, while they contained
[Amit Varma]: assholery, weren't really abrogating consent, he just misused his position of power, asked
[Amit Varma]: some women whether he could strip in front of them, they said no, he didn't.
[Amit Varma]: It is still an extremely asshole thing to do.
[Amit Varma]: And I would not associate with someone like that.
[Amit Varma]: But do you want to invalidate his later art?
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to say that people absolutely cannot change?
[Amit Varma]: So I'm a little conflicted about this, you know, so my feelings about him have become
[Amit Varma]: very mixed.
[Amit Varma]: But my feelings about his art remain what they were, because I can't be expected to
[Amit Varma]: change my ascetic judgment of something, because of something else that I came to know later.
[Amit Varma]: So I guess at some level, we are making personal judgments about, you know, how much something
[Amit Varma]: triggers us or affects us.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, you mentioned animals, the film I mentioned, Cannibal Holocaust, one
[Amit Varma]: of the controversies around it was that six dogs were killed live during the film, while
[Amit Varma]: they were killed, this very elegant, classical-ish music by Riz Otto Lani was being played in
[Amit Varma]: the background.
[Amit Varma]: I can totally understand why you would never watch that despite my praise of the film.
[Amit Varma]: So it's kind of personal.
[Amit Varma]: But at some level, I think your one's judgment of the art should stand apart from the judgment
[Amit Varma]: of the artist.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, very sort of muddy territory.
[Amit Varma]: Shall I go on to my next question?
[Amit Varma]: Or would you like to add to this?
[Amit Varma]: No, no, no.
[Guest]: I just wanted to add to that again, you know, that based on what you said, the one thing
[Guest]: I just like to say again, you know, and this is where self analysis is such a, you know,
[Guest]: difficult terrain.
[Guest]: You know, you just, you can just get caught up in it.
[Guest]: And you know, obviously, it's something that, that all of us, we all egotistical enough
[Guest]: to want to do it.
[Guest]: But, but it's so pointless at times, because I really don't know, while you were talking,
[Guest]: it struck me that I don't really feel that conflicted about my favourite artists.
[Guest]: If I, if I find out that they've done something really terrible, something that I would disapprove
[Guest]: of, even to the degree of, of committing crimes that, that in a fairer world than the one
[Guest]: that we live in, they would be punished for.
[Guest]: And that ideally, they should have been in jail at a point when they were actually creating
[Guest]: some of my favourite albums or films or books or whatever.
[Guest]: Even with that knowledge, I usually find it quite easy to still enjoy the work.
[Guest]: I don't want, I feel like okay, yes, injustice has been done, or, you know, if it's not a
[Guest]: you know, not the sort of crime that, that is really punishable, then assholery has been
[Guest]: indulged in.
[Guest]: But it doesn't matter that much to me.
[Guest]: And this applies even to personal heroes now, take someone like Bachchan, there are lots
[Guest]: of things in his, you know, in his real world personality that I find incredibly irritating,
[Guest]: including the things that he tweets, these things that I keep hearing, I don't actually
[Guest]: follow anyone on Twitter, but, but I keep hearing these things or seeing screenshots
[Guest]: and, and the general sense or sense of this person who no longer has a personality of
[Guest]: his own, or whatever, he's just sort of just this anodyne thing, none of that has made
[Guest]: the slightest difference to the thrill that I still feel inside me, if I happen to get
[Guest]: on to YouTube, and I see a wonderfully performed song sequence like Hai Ke Paan Banaras Wala
[Guest]: or Jahan Teri Hai Nazar Hai, or O Saati Re from O Kaddar Ka Sikandar, which is, which
[Guest]: is a favourite film, I'm just watching it and thinking, oh, there on the screen is one
[Guest]: of my personal heroes, somebody who made my life better at various points in my life.
[Guest]: The same is true for Sachin Tendulkar, his, his, his innings, you know, came at a time
[Guest]: in my life when they were, you know, among the, you know, 96, 97, 98, when they were
[Guest]: among the few good things in my life.
[Guest]: And I find it perfectly easy to separate that from judgment of, of the, the annoying things
[Guest]: or the dubious things that one hears about Tendulkar in the current day, for instance.
[Guest]: So I don't know, maybe, maybe I just sort of find that separation easier to pull off,
[Guest]: you know, maybe there's something about my reptile brain that just sort of does, does
[Guest]: that, does those things, because I don't agonize a lot about these, these questions somehow.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you absolutely fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: Now sticking to the, like, some of this art versus artist separation obviously comes about
[Amit Varma]: because of the politics of our current times, and some of it is great and but some of it
[Amit Varma]: worries me.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you have spoken in the past of quote unquote, woke criticism.
[Amit Varma]: And there is often a sense I get these days that all art is not just being evaluated through
[Amit Varma]: the prism of that phrase, which both of us have made fun of in the past, how it speaks
[Amit Varma]: to the human condition, but also through the prism of a certain kind of politics are the
[Amit Varma]: current are the correct values kind of being depicted here.
[Amit Varma]: And the point is, it's easy for us to look at something like a Kabir Singh and say that
[Amit Varma]: oh, that is obviously they're glorifying, you know, a certain kind of toxic masculinity
[Amit Varma]: and therefore we must condemn it.
[Amit Varma]: And I agree with that.
[Amit Varma]: It's, it's, it's just horrendous.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, the point is in most art and most good literature and most good
[Amit Varma]: cinema, you have characters who are conflicted characters who do bad things, you know, characters
[Amit Varma]: who are not woke, I mean, the whole point of art is that you're depicting humanity as
[Amit Varma]: it is humanity is imperfect humanity contains multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: But when you sort of look at that art, say you judge a film because of what its characters
[Amit Varma]: do, it seems bizarre to me, but I've seen that happen.
[Amit Varma]: Or you try to talk about what a film's politics is, you know, then it becomes to use a favorite
[Amit Varma]: phrase of many of these people, it becomes problematic for me, because I just want to
[Amit Varma]: look at art on its own terms.
[Amit Varma]: I don't care about what agenda there is, or what agenda you can read into it, where also
[Amit Varma]: a lot of overthinking can go on.
[Amit Varma]: So as a critic, what do you feel about this?
[Guest]: Well, I feel many, many different things about this and when and how many hours do you have?
[Guest]: Don't answer that.
[Guest]: Well, I could start controversially by saying that, that I wouldn't even take what you said
[Guest]: about Kabir Singh as a given, a because I haven't watched the film myself.
[Guest]: So of course, I'm not going to make up my mind about a film that I haven't watched.
[Guest]: And that I don't really have, I don't really plan to watch anytime in the near future.
[Guest]: But I do know, at least three or four people whose judgment I respect a great deal whose
[Guest]: prisms I respect a great deal.
[Guest]: One of whom is a woman, which may or may not be important, who did not feel that way about
[Guest]: the film at all, that the film is a glorification of toxic masculinity, they felt very differently.
[Guest]: And these are liberal people I'm talking about, broadly liberal people.
[Guest]: So I'm not making those assumptions about any film at all.
[Guest]: Having said that, I will express my view on Kabir Singh only after I've seen it and not
[Guest]: before that.
[Guest]: There's not an expression of a particular judgment or a non judgment.
[Guest]: Having said that, I also want to just touch on, again, you've articulated a lot of the
[Guest]: issues, you know, quite neatly, but I'd also just touch on this thing of, it's not just
[Guest]: a matter of viewing art for its own sake, or in, it's not just a matter of that, because
[Guest]: because with that, then of course, you know, you, you also come to things like like the
[Guest]: films of Lenny Reifenstahl, and I'm not going to say the Birth of a Nation, but but, but
[Guest]: definitely Lenny Reifenstahl's films, which were, you know, explicitly Nazi propaganda.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, those are those are overtly political and politics is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: So it's fine to condemn those, but I'm obviously not talking about those sort of edge cases.
[Guest]: What I meant was, they're also in parts, at least they're pretty good, good films in terms
[Guest]: of the use of the formal cinematic devices, and techniques, you know, in ways to achieve
[Guest]: a certain effect.
[Guest]: And many people still continue to point that out while while also, of course, holding forth
[Guest]: on the problematic aspects.
[Guest]: But what happens is that, that when a film is looked at only through the prism of a,
[Guest]: of a very clearly defined ideology, and, and is looked at, from this point of view that,
[Guest]: what is the film?
[Guest]: What is the politics of this film?
[Guest]: What is the politics of this filmmaker or scriptwriter?
[Guest]: The thing is, these are questions that that very often do not have clear cut answers.
[Guest]: Sometimes they do, of course, sometimes they do, you know, and there are cases of films
[Guest]: that are made explicitly as propaganda, as you pointed out.
[Guest]: But with with a lot of art, including art that seems self evidently to some people as
[Guest]: as being, you know, being as setting out to fulfill a particular agenda.
[Guest]: What is really happening is that a director or a novelist or a scriptwriter is trying
[Guest]: to build a world.
[Guest]: And in the building of that world, what is happening is that moral judgments, moral or
[Guest]: ideological positions are being suspended to a great degree.
[Guest]: And what they are trying to do is to be is to be as true as possible to the characters
[Guest]: within this world.
[Guest]: Now, if those characters include people who, who we liberals think are quote unquote problematic,
[Guest]: then you still will have a situation where a serious novelist or a serious director or
[Guest]: a scriptwriter, if they are trying to create this work honestly, will be putting themselves
[Guest]: in the mind space of this character, will be forming certain degrees of empathy for
[Guest]: this character's actions as well.
[Guest]: And that, you know, when it is presented in the final film, it can easily seem to someone
[Guest]: who someone who's looking at the film only through a very specific ideological lens,
[Guest]: it will seem like glorification, whereas the truth might actually be a little more complex.
[Guest]: It might just be tied into the process of world building, which is something that that
[Guest]: that most serious creative people do.
[Guest]: And, and when you're deep in it, I mean, you've been a novelist yourself, you've done I know
[Guest]: you've you've written other sorts of fiction as well.
[Guest]: You know what this is about your when you're dealing with this very difficult business
[Guest]: of creating a world from the inside out and putting yourself in the heads of different
[Guest]: sorts of characters, you are not necessarily thinking about moral positions, or about what
[Guest]: what the takeaway, what the correct takeaway for your reader or your viewer should be.
[Guest]: And I think a lot of these workish, strictly ideological takes on films only want takeaways,
[Guest]: they only want a clear cut answer.
[Guest]: Does this film endorse or does it only depict, does it you know, what what is the politics
[Guest]: of this particular novelist in creating this character?
[Guest]: And then those are subjective judgments anyway, but then a lot of the people who make those
[Guest]: judgments will behave as if they have the final moral word.
[Guest]: And anybody who, you know, feels differently is morally compromised or just not engaged
[Guest]: enough or whatever it is.
[Guest]: So that's, that's one of the most troubling aspects of some of the political conversations
[Guest]: around cinema and literature these days for me.
[Guest]: I know speaking speaking as someone who's, you know, I'm on this podcast with you right
[Guest]: now, saying all these things and what will be a public forum soon.
[Guest]: Even so, I know that that I feel very constrained if I if I find myself in the presence of someone
[Guest]: who is just going on and on about how regressive a particular film is, or this character so
[Guest]: problematic, this film is so regressive, I sometimes feel like it's it's not worth my
[Guest]: while to argue, I'll just keep quiet.
[Guest]: And then and then, you know, and maybe just try and change the subject or something.
[Guest]: And that's a pity because because because that is definitely affecting discourse.
[Guest]: And I know there are many people like me who feel that, who feel that that that a lot of
[Guest]: the left liberal slash woke criticism, cultural criticism has just become all about very narrow
[Guest]: ideological prisms, or narrow ideological definitions, rather than looking at the entirety
[Guest]: of what a film or a book might be doing, the many contradictions that exist within a particular
[Guest]: creative work.
[Guest]: Now, one of your earlier guests on scene and the unseen Parumita Vora has spoken very eloquently
[Guest]: about this in the context of a lot of Hindi films that get sweepingly described as regressive
[Guest]: or problematic or toxic, and she's defended them in her writings and in some of her talks
[Guest]: as well, about how so many of these works are actually far more complex than than many
[Guest]: people realize there are there are there are different things going on in there.
[Guest]: You know, you might have one scene or one line of dialogue that that seems really terrible
[Guest]: and patriarchal and whatever, but there'll be something else, there'll be there'll be
[Guest]: another impulse in the same scene that will also be working against that, or providing
[Guest]: a cushion against that.
[Guest]: And that's how a lot of popular cinema tends to work.
[Guest]: I don't know if any of this has made sense, but
[Amit Varma]: No, it makes a lot of sense.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just a couple of episodes ago, I had Kavita Krishnan, the feminist on the show.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, why am I even saying a feminist?
[Amit Varma]: We are all feminists.
[Amit Varma]: I would hope.
[Amit Varma]: I certainly am one.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the things Kavita spoke about was how people look at Enid Blyton today, where
[Amit Varma]: they're trying to almost, in hindsight, cancel Enid Blyton.
[Amit Varma]: And her point was, look, I read Enid Blyton, I loved Enid Blyton.
[Amit Varma]: And the characters I identified most with and the characters that Enid Blyton, in fact,
[Amit Varma]: made stand out were the people who are bucking the system, the tomboys, for example, among
[Amit Varma]: the girls at Mallory Towers, you know, so you got to look a little deeper than the fact
[Amit Varma]: is that society is regressive.
[Amit Varma]: People are complex.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a job of art to capture all of this and not necessarily to pass judgment, otherwise
[Amit Varma]: you become facile propaganda.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my thinking is and tell me what you think about this is that there are really two impulses
[Amit Varma]: or two sort of phenomena that kind of lead to this phenomena.
[Amit Varma]: One is that on the one hand, it might seem that in the age of social media, all of history
[Amit Varma]: is available to us.
[Amit Varma]: You know, unlike you and me, we don't have to scramble to watch movies from the past
[Amit Varma]: as we used to do in the 1980s, in your case, going to embassy video libraries, borrowing.
[Amit Varma]: Now it's all on the click of a button legally or otherwise.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, that's not totally accurate to be in the sense that yes, it is all out
[Amit Varma]: there, but I think as Jonathan Haidt pointed out in an episode of a podcast I produced
[Amit Varma]: Brave New World, which is hosted by Vasant Dhar, he spoke to Jonathan Haidt and if I
[Amit Varma]: remember correctly, it was Haidt only who pointed out that what most people consume
[Amit Varma]: on social media is what has been produced in the last three days.
[Amit Varma]: So it's very current, it's bound to the current time, they're not really going too far back
[Amit Varma]: into the past.
[Amit Varma]: Now, in your case, your education of cinema, like even when you said that you don't watch
[Amit Varma]: too many films today, the bottom line is you have put in a lot of time watching films and
[Amit Varma]: watching films of the past.
[Amit Varma]: All of it informs the way you look at cinema.
[Amit Varma]: And that's true of every good film critic, including you know, someone like Bharatwaj
[Amit Varma]: Rangan comes to mind who was also you know, such a star during the blogging days and a
[Amit Varma]: fantastic critic.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, you have this bedrock of historical exposure, which informs whatever you do, but
[Amit Varma]: everyone today is kind of stuck in the current moment where everything you're consuming was
[Amit Varma]: maybe produced in the last three days and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And this can sometimes garble your perspective, and you almost in a sense become trapped in
[Amit Varma]: the present.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this brings me to the second factor.
[Amit Varma]: And this is true, especially if you're on social media, where you're even more trapped
[Amit Varma]: in the present, because everything is off the moment, where in social media, what is
[Amit Varma]: the imperative for a lot of the people out there, especially the young people, is to
[Amit Varma]: raise their status within whatever in groups they have chosen within social media.
[Amit Varma]: The vast silent majority haven't really made such choices.
[Amit Varma]: And luckily, I think, you know, you spoke about these things that you're saying on my
[Amit Varma]: podcast in a public forum, but I would imagine that podcast listeners who have gotten this
[Amit Varma]: far are not the kind of people who outrage on social media anyway, so you and I are safe.
[Amit Varma]: But social media people form their echo chambers and they need to raise their status within
[Amit Varma]: those echo chambers.
[Amit Varma]: They need to posture their purity in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: They can do it by attacking people on the other side and always attacking people never
[Amit Varma]: engaging with arguments.
[Amit Varma]: They can do it by attacking people on their own side for not being pure enough, which
[Amit Varma]: eventually happens to everybody.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, most of the people, the vokes cancel, seem to be former vokes, in a sense in current
[Amit Varma]: times.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, they're going to come for you eventually, unless you produce absolutely
[Amit Varma]: nothing and only outrage, in which case you're safe.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, these two come together that on the one hand, you don't really have a deep
[Amit Varma]: understanding of whatever it is you're critiquing, whether it's literature or cinema or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, you need to posture all the time and this is easy meat, right?
[Amit Varma]: You shit on a film, you say that, oh, it is regressive, this character is problematic.
[Amit Varma]: This director tweeted this when he was 16 years old.
[Amit Varma]: And there's absolutely no cost to this kind of posturing to you.
[Amit Varma]: But it has such a harmful effect on the discourse, because these people may be a vocal minority,
[Amit Varma]: but because they are the vocal ones, the majority of the discourse seems to be like this.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, do you kind of agree with this?
[Amit Varma]: Are there things that you would add to this?
[Amit Varma]: And if this is broadly what the picture is, then do we have hope moving forward?
[Guest]: I don't know where, as a part time nihilist, I always say there's no hope moving forward.
[Guest]: But this, no, I agree with pretty much everything, you know, Amit, I don't like using the term
[Guest]: virtue signaling, because I think it's I think it's a very easy term to use, I'm very tempted
[Guest]: to do it.
[Guest]: And I do end up doing it, especially in private conversations.
[Guest]: But one reason I don't like using it is because of something that you touched on, which is
[Guest]: that, when, for instance, and I'm not really on Twitter, but on Facebook, as sometimes
[Guest]: when I go through these phases, where I see a lot of feeds and things, very often I see
[Guest]: the term virtue signaling being used in a deprecatory way by people who I myself, at
[Guest]: some point in the past have thought of as virtue signalers.
[Guest]: And then I wonder, maybe people are thinking that way about me as well in other contexts.
[Guest]: So you know, so it just becomes one of those loops and you know, and it's even a term like,
[Guest]: you know, the workster use pejoratively, which is something I like doing, and I like doing
[Guest]: it in a slightly sort of cheesy way, you know, using the word using the Star Wars terms,
[Guest]: Wookiees, or Ewoks or whatever, it's, it's fun to do that.
[Guest]: But but a part of me does feel a bit uncertain and uneasy when when I do it, because I know
[Guest]: that there are probably contexts in which people can feel they can say the same thing
[Guest]: about me, as well, based on things that I've definitely things I've written in the past,
[Guest]: and possibly even now, broadly agree with everything you're saying.
[Guest]: It does disturb me, though, you know, and now, just to again, perhaps come back a little
[Guest]: bit to what we were talking about a bit earlier, I was on a conversation once with, you know,
[Guest]: just just doing this online lecture for somebody.
[Guest]: And there were these these very engaged young people talking about films and asking for
[Guest]: recommendations of old films, and it was it was great fun.
[Guest]: And then subsequently, one of them started following me on Instagram, and I happened
[Guest]: to go and see the Instagram page.
[Guest]: And I saw this write up about the Philadelphia story, the 1940 film, The Philadelphia Story,
[Guest]: which with the Catherine Hepburn and Cary Grant and James Stewart, one of my favorite
[Guest]: films from that era, and the language used for this film, but it was so patronizing and
[Guest]: condescending words like nauseating, misogynistic, you know, stuff like that, just based on what
[Guest]: happens to the to the main female character, Tracy Lord over the course of the story, the
[Guest]: fact that she sort of that she did in this, this, this young writer's interpretation,
[Guest]: she's just sort of being manipulated by all the men in her life, and eventually just driven
[Guest]: to the right man, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And I was looking at that and thinking, you know, the Philadelphia story of all films
[Guest]: is being described as nauseous and misogynistic.
[Guest]: These are strong words, you know, it's incumbent on us to use language with a little more care.
[Guest]: Because ultimately, what's going to happen is we, you know, words like misogynistic or
[Guest]: Islamophobia, or Islamophobic or whatever, these should be strong, condemnatory words.
[Guest]: But what's happening in a lot of the current discourses, they are being used in such casual
[Guest]: and careless ways, that they'll end up losing their potency to start with.
[Guest]: For someone like me, they've already lost their potency.
[Guest]: I see the word misogynistic somewhere written somewhere, my first impulse is to think there's
[Guest]: just some some workster overreacting to something.
[Guest]: That's my first response, rightly or wrongly.
[Guest]: And I find this, again, to use that word problematic, the word that we supposedly dislike.
[Guest]: But at the same time, I do have a lot of sympathy for for young people who are living in this
[Guest]: time of so much clutter, so much stuff that's available to them all the time, even someone
[Guest]: like me, you know, if I, if I, at my age, if I get a recommendation for a for a limited
[Guest]: series, like like Mayor of East Town, or whatever, which is just seven, seven episodes or something.
[Guest]: And I get, you know, the motivated enough to watch it because of the recommendations
[Guest]: and because I like Kate Winslet, or I like the genre or something, I'm still taking seven
[Guest]: hours of my time out.
[Guest]: And at the end of it, I'm thinking, wow, you know, even if it was good, I've just spent
[Guest]: so much of my time doing this.
[Guest]: This is despite the fact that I'm also aware that there are older things that I need to
[Guest]: watch or rewatch for columns or for some of my own writing, and I need to find the time
[Guest]: for that.
[Guest]: I can only sympathize with with young people who are in this world where, where they're
[Guest]: binge watching maybe four or five or six series every month, and watching films and so on.
[Guest]: It's completely understandable that they will end up lacking a sense of history.
[Guest]: I don't really think they're going to be any easy solutions to this.
[Guest]: I've been in classes like like I indicated just now, I've been in classes where 20-21
[Guest]: year olds with utmost sincerity have asked me, how do we find the time to watch all these
[Guest]: old films that we want to watch?
[Guest]: And by old films, they mostly mean films that were not made in this millennium, films made
[Guest]: before 2000.
[Guest]: I mean, there's a whole generation of movie buffs right now who think that anything pre-Christopher
[Guest]: Nolan is, is ancient, but they don't have the time to do this and I do have basic sympathy
[Guest]: for that because all of us have finite time, we are just being inundated with so much information,
[Guest]: so many things to watch across all the OTT platforms across all the other spaces.
[Guest]: Even I feel that pressure.
[Guest]: So I can imagine what it's like for for younger people.
[Guest]: So so no easy solutions to this.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, the only thing I could, the only piece of advice I would give anyone
[Guest]: was to, you know, if you have seven days a week to watch, you know, to spend four or
[Guest]: five hours per day watching things, just try and, and create a schedule for yourself.
[Guest]: Tell yourself that that two days a week you will watch something that was made pre-1970
[Guest]: for instance.
[Guest]: You know, something that that comes out of a movie recommendation or a criterion recommendation
[Guest]: or whatever.
[Guest]: And even that won't be enough because then you know, you'll end up watching American
[Guest]: films or French films, they might not engage with with old Hindi cinema, which is which
[Guest]: is something that's that's very difficult for young people to engage with now.
[Guest]: Because because because everybody's grown away from that tradition of the song and dance
[Guest]: and the masala.
[Guest]: It's it's very difficult to start start magically tuning your mind to that sort of thing.
[Guest]: So so so no easy answers at all.
[Guest]: There's no hope.
[Amit Varma]: There's no hope basically.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I kind of, I mean, do I kind of agree?
[Unknown]: I guess I kind of agree.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, I don't want to die anyway.
[Amit Varma]: So if you look at the really long, long term, of course, there's no hope.
[Amit Varma]: But hope for what?
[Amit Varma]: The fact that sometimes I have to remind myself that look, I am in my 40s.
[Amit Varma]: And most of these young people have a different frame of reference entirely.
[Amit Varma]: Like I think I saw this tweet recently, I think Aakar Patel did it, who's tweeting recently
[Amit Varma]: is incredibly entertaining.
[Amit Varma]: And Aakar was referring to some piece of news somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, Oh, bloody, you know, basically, Oh, bloody, but he's spelted Oh, bloody.
[Amit Varma]: So below that someone commented Oh, bloody.
[Amit Varma]: And below that someone commented life goes on.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm like, only someone of my generation actually gets this.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the moment I saw the reply, Oh, bloody, I was tempted to type life goes on till I
[Amit Varma]: saw someone's already done it reference, of course, to the famous Beatles song.
[Guest]: Please, please tell me you tweeted, bruh.
[Guest]: No.
[Amit Varma]: No, I didn't tweet, bruh.
[Amit Varma]: That's something you got to remind yourself that these people have a very different frame
[Amit Varma]: of reference that, you know, that they may not have sort of heard or watched or read
[Amit Varma]: all of this stuff from the past.
[Amit Varma]: And but what has now happened is and I don't think that this sort of a lot of these shallow
[Amit Varma]: expressions from people who haven't engaged with cinema, but will nevertheless pass judgment
[Amit Varma]: on it on the basis of the politics.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think that worries me in one particular context, which is I don't think less people
[Amit Varma]: are serious about cinema.
[Amit Varma]: If anything, I think there are more serious film watchers now than ever before, because
[Amit Varma]: you have the means to engage deeply with cinema and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't think that that is necessarily an issue.
[Amit Varma]: But what is necessarily an issue is that a lot of the shallow posturing is just dominating
[Amit Varma]: the discourse out there.
[Amit Varma]: So to a newcomer who would earlier 15 years ago, perhaps have discovered a movie through
[Amit Varma]: reading something that you wrote on your blog, will now not want to watch the movie because
[Amit Varma]: somebody else has called it toxic or misogynistic or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And that pollution of the discourse in general worries me.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, moving aside from this sort of political angle, which is what it is, one
[Amit Varma]: of the good things that's definitely happened is in terms of form, like it strikes me that
[Amit Varma]: in the same way that you and I, we were talking about how in our writing, we were liberated
[Amit Varma]: by blogging, because that form remove many of these constraints that we otherwise have.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that there has been a sort of a revolution of form within the audiovisual
[Amit Varma]: medium in the last two or three decades as well, which, you know, for me, most significantly,
[Amit Varma]: when HBO brought out the wire, that for me is a turning point.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, there were great shows before it, I mean, Kieslowski made Decalogue for
[Amit Varma]: Polish television.
[Amit Varma]: So that is, of course, a pinnacle of a series like this.
[Amit Varma]: But for me, what was so incredibly exciting about the wire is in particular that that
[Amit Varma]: show is that it allowed its creators to take on an almost novelistic sweep.
[Amit Varma]: Like before that, I would think of each film as a sort of if I had to compare it to literature,
[Amit Varma]: I would say it's really a short story of sorts.
[Amit Varma]: It's one kind of narrative, you have two or three hours is a limit to how deep you can
[Amit Varma]: go.
[Amit Varma]: That's what it is.
[Amit Varma]: What the wire really did was, it didn't have one main character, it had a whole bunch of
[Amit Varma]: characters with tremendous depth.
[Amit Varma]: It had that sweep, it had that range.
[Amit Varma]: And what we now have because of the OTT revolution that, you know, Netflix kind of kickstarted
[Amit Varma]: or really got going with House of Cards in the subsequent decade is that you have this
[Amit Varma]: form.
[Amit Varma]: So in a lot of terms, your audiovisual storytelling can now really expand and go places.
[Amit Varma]: So number one, do you think this is significant because I don't know what the term cinema
[Amit Varma]: even means.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm using the general catch all term audiovisual storytelling, but it just seems to me that
[Amit Varma]: this has way more scope today than it ever did in the same way as, for example, printed
[Amit Varma]: books would have enabled longer forms of literature, which might not otherwise have been the case.
[Amit Varma]: So on the one hand there is this, but on the other hand, you also have the means of production
[Amit Varma]: becoming much, much cheaper, which is why you have people on YouTube and TikTok expressing
[Amit Varma]: themselves doing brave new things.
[Amit Varma]: Like I don't know if you watch the vlogs of Casey Neistat, who is a YouTube creator, who's
[Amit Varma]: doing very cinematic things.
[Amit Varma]: At one point he would post a vlog a day and they would all be basically short films of
[Amit Varma]: him doing interesting things, but made in a very cinematic way, creating a language
[Amit Varma]: of his own.
[Amit Varma]: Very influential.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly in TikTok, you know, which like a lot of the stuff that becomes popular is
[Amit Varma]: just wisecrack based stuff or funny stuff or memetic stuff.
[Amit Varma]: But there was also a lot of other deeper stuff that was going on there, which was absolutely
[Amit Varma]: mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: And it's hopefully still going on in the rest of the world, though sadly India banned it.
[Amit Varma]: So the two separate questions, one, do you see that this expansion of form as something
[Amit Varma]: that has led to a golden age of cinema, which I believe we are in, there's a lot of crap
[Amit Varma]: around, but I believe that, you know, and could be the selection bias based on what
[Amit Varma]: I get to see now, as opposed to what I got to see, say, 20 years earlier.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, would you broadly agree with that?
[Amit Varma]: And then do you see, is there a sense of excitement also about these new forms of filmmaking that
[Amit Varma]: is being enabled by technology?
[Guest]: No, again, I agree with pretty much everything you've said, even though I haven't experienced
[Guest]: a lot of this stuff, you know, TikTok, for instance, is something that I haven't experienced.
[Guest]: I know about your regard for a lot of what has been done there.
[Guest]: And also, I find myself just in principle, I find myself quite irritated by some of the
[Guest]: snobbery that was aimed at TikTok, especially when it was done by people who had this means
[Guest]: of expressing their creativity, if they had had certain forms of creativity, and a lot
[Guest]: of people from, you know, from another class who were sort of looking down on it and just
[Guest]: being very condescending and saying some appallingly classist things about it.
[Guest]: So that's why in principle, I agree with that completely, despite not having really experienced
[Guest]: as much TikTok as you have.
[Guest]: Likewise, for the for these shows, you know, I haven't seen The Wire, I haven't seen so
[Guest]: many of these iconic shows, I haven't even watched Breaking Bad, for instance, there
[Guest]: are so many shows that you'd be astonished to learn that I haven't watched and, and I
[Guest]: don't think I'm going to end up doing it because my mind just recoils at the idea of taking
[Guest]: out 30-40 hours for something like this.
[Guest]: I don't know if I'll be able to do it now.
[Guest]: But but again, in principle, and also based on my limited engagement with these things,
[Guest]: because there are some series that I've watched, including a few of the Indian series, which
[Guest]: which I had been asked to specifically review, which I keep getting told are not as good
[Guest]: or as polished as the best international series, but, but I liked a lot of stuff about stuff
[Guest]: in them. And I have great respect for the format.
[Guest]: So you know, for the way in which in the hands of a good showrunner, a good scriptwriter,
[Guest]: it's possible to just create this long narrative arc, to just sort of plan it out, you know,
[Guest]: right from the start, and to have this trajectory where, where something that has been done
[Guest]: in episode one or episode two, makes complete sense only, you know, perhaps in season two
[Guest]: or season three, you know, it's been planned out that well beforehand.
[Guest]: And that's something that's that, that you can only admire, you know, I often find myself
[Guest]: wishing that that Alan Moore had been 30 or 40 years younger, because I think he would
[Guest]: have been a fabulous showrunner for, for, you know, and I'm not just saying this because
[Guest]: there's actually been a series of Watchmen. But I just think about, you know, the, what,
[Guest]: what someone like Alan Moore, a younger version of Alan Moore would have done with something
[Guest]: like From Hell or Watchmen or something, you know, you know, just creating this absolutely
[Guest]: brilliant series, because because he did that so much in his actual writing and in the,
[Guest]: in the, in the directions that he gave his artists for panel creation, back in the 80s
[Guest]: and 90s. So, so I'm a big, so yeah, so in principle, I'm a big fan of this sort of thing.
[Guest]: I was a late convert to it, because there was a time I think maybe seven, eight, nine
[Guest]: years ago, when when people were raving about, about how there's this golden age of television
[Guest]: and how so much of what we have on television is brilliantly cinematic, it's as it's better
[Guest]: than most of what you see in cinema halls.
[Guest]: At that point, I said, really, I mean, it's, how is it going to be cinematic? It'll probably
[Guest]: just be pictures of people talking, right? It'll be because I still have that stereotyped
[Guest]: idea of what, what a TV show look like, say, back in the 70s or 80s. You know, I'm talking
[Guest]: about international shows. So, of course, I was pleasantly surprised by what I did end
[Guest]: up watching eventually. And I completely get that this is a very exciting time. I do tend
[Guest]: to be slightly resistant to the talk of golden ages, partly because of the recency biases
[Guest]: and things that we have, partly because because I'm so old in my head that I find it very
[Guest]: difficult to think of anything other than 1940s Hollywood, as as the golden age of cinema,
[Guest]: or even or even the 1920s, when when the silent film was heading towards his great apotheosis,
[Guest]: and then was unfortunately destroyed by the coming of sound. So, so I'm, I'm that vintage.
[Guest]: But But again, in principle, yes, I have no trouble with with with anyone referring to
[Guest]: the current moment as a golden age, in terms of web series, TV, in particular, OTT.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, so now I've come to know that, you know, given that you live in that era,
[Amit Varma]: the Philadelphia story for you must be something made by young whippersnappers. But it's so
[Amit Varma]: fascinating that we can kind of inhabit not just different characters, but different eras
[Amit Varma]: in this way and immerse ourselves in different worlds. I mean, that's the beauty of cinema,
[Amit Varma]: literature, art, all of that. Now, so we've already chatted for around three hours, and
[Amit Varma]: we haven't even spoken about books, I wanted to speak to you about writing and your writing
[Amit Varma]: process we haven't even gotten there. And I wanted to chat with you about Hindi cinema
[Amit Varma]: and Rishikesh Mukherjee as well, which we will save for a future episode. So I will
[Amit Varma]: extract that promise from you now that we'll talk again. But before we end this particular
[Amit Varma]: episode, normally, I kind of end my episodes by asking my guests to recommend books that
[Amit Varma]: they love. But in your case, it's going to be both books and films that you know, and
[Amit Varma]: I don't want a best of list. That's an insane expectation. But just, you know, off the top
[Amit Varma]: of your head, five books or films that you feel you would like to share with the world.
[Guest]: Five books, five films, my God. I was oddly enough, I wasn't prepared for this moment
[Guest]: in the podcast, even though it's such an obvious one.
[Amit Varma]: Or three of each or whatever comes to mind. I don't want it to be like a formal thing
[Amit Varma]: ki arey yeh...
[Guest]: How about 300 of each?
[Guest]: Done.
[Guest]: I'll take the easy way out by recommending one Rishikesh Mukherjee film that no one seems
[Guest]: to have heard of, including possibly Rishita himself. But it really is it is honestly,
[Guest]: one of my absolute favorites. I feel very defensively about it because it's the sort
[Guest]: of film that just you know, even those who do discover it, unfortunately, it's available
[Guest]: only in a very ordinary print online on YouTube. It hasn't been restored or anything. It's
[Guest]: a 1965 film called Bibi Aur Makaan. And Amit, in fact, I actually think this might be a
[Guest]: film that might even be worth your while to watch, or to at least try and watch some of.
[Guest]: Because I think you will at the very least agree with me that it's a very interesting
[Guest]: Hindi film for its time for what it does with the musical form. It was produced by Hemant
[Guest]: Kumar, who was of course the great music director. And it was Gulzar's first collaboration as
[Guest]: a lyricist with Rishikesh Mukherjee. And it's this film that's basically almost operatic
[Guest]: in terms of how it tells this fairly lowbrow comedy story of friends who are forced into
[Guest]: a cross-dressing shenanigan because they can't get accommodation. So two of them have to
[Guest]: pretend to be wives of the other two. But it just uses musical sequences so interestingly,
[Guest]: as you know, as part of the narrative, as things that take the narrative forward. Sequences
[Guest]: that actually require the actors to be really acting, performing, requires a certain degree
[Guest]: of orchestration in terms of how the movements are done and so on. It's an example of, it's
[Guest]: definitely a counterpoint to the idea that many people have that a lot of Hindi cinema
[Guest]: just used musical sequences as a standalone, which was completely divorced from the main
[Guest]: narrative. So it's a film that I have a lot of love for. It's also the Rishikesh Mukherjee
[Guest]: comedy that that's a direct precursor to the later well-known comedies like Golmaal and
[Guest]: Chhupke Chhupke. Other films, well, Psycho, of course, I've already spoken about. I'm
[Guest]: not going to get into all that. I'm not going to say Jaane Bhi Do Yaro either because that's
[Guest]: that's that's just too obvious. And because I've, I'm probably fed up of the film by now,
[Guest]: I don't think I could watch it again after having watched it those dozens of times for
[Guest]: the for the book that I did on it. But there are lots of noir films of the 1940s, again,
[Guest]: coming back to 1940s Hollywood that I have a lot of time for and a lot of love for. One
[Guest]: of them, of course, is the Billy Wilder film called An Ace in the Hole, also known as The
[Guest]: Big Carnival, which seems like extremely resistant as I am to things like relevance or topicality.
[Guest]: It feels like a very relevant film for the current day as well. It's 70 years old and
[Guest]: it has Kirk Douglas as this this reporter who tries to exploit a very tragic situation
[Guest]: involving a man who's been trapped in a cave. And it feels like something that's that's
[Guest]: very pertinent to the media carnivals of the current day as well. And of course, there
[Guest]: was a Hindi film from a few years ago called Peepli Live, which which also explored similar
[Guest]: terrain, a media carnival built around an inherently tragic and personal situation.
[Guest]: Well, those are three books. I grew up with a tremendous love for Enid Blyton's Faraway
[Guest]: Tree series. I think a lot of the trio of books that that made up these stories about
[Guest]: about this little brother and sister who moved to the countryside and then, you know, find
[Guest]: themselves being taken to all these magical lands at the top of a magical tree deep in
[Guest]: the woods. It's also one of those books that first opened my eyes to the possibilities
[Guest]: of of how writing can literally take you to uncharted places or to new lands or to places
[Guest]: that otherwise can exist only in your fantasies. As someone who's been a huge Mahabharat fan
[Guest]: for the longest time, one book that I love is Shivaji Sawant's Samrityunjay, which was
[Guest]: written in Marathi. It's been translated in English by P. Lal and Nandini Noppani. I've
[Guest]: read the English version and I've also read a great deal of the Hindi version. The Hindi
[Guest]: translation is the only book that I've read a lot of in the only novel that I've read
[Guest]: a lot of in Hindi. And it also ties in a little bit with some of the stuff you were talking
[Guest]: about earlier, because because because this is a book that centered around the character
[Guest]: of Kald, who was one of my personal heroes growing up, one of those tragic figures, those
[Guest]: anti-hero figures that that I felt a tremendous affinity to, perhaps as a melancholy child
[Guest]: myself. And what I love about what Shivaji Sawant did with this book is, is how he again
[Guest]: tying in with some of the things we were talking about earlier about the problematic behavior
[Guest]: of people and so on, how he puts us in the mind space of a very conflicted and tormented
[Guest]: character at precisely the point when that character is doing some morally very questionable
[Guest]: things. So, for instance, during the humiliation of Draupadi in the Swayamvar, after the dice
[Guest]: came, Kald's part in that, in that process, there's this brilliant 20-page passage in
[Guest]: this book, which counts among the finest bits of literature I've read anywhere, where in
[Guest]: Kald's voice, in his first person voice, Shivaji Sawant just gives us this man who goes from
[Guest]: a point where he actually wants to be the savior. He wants to be the chivalrous hero
[Guest]: to this woman who's in distress. He goes from there, over, you know, a series of things
[Guest]: that happen, you know, the way his mind is working in this very fevered way, the way
[Guest]: he's responding to the things that are happening around him. He goes from there to actually
[Guest]: saying some of the cruelest and most savage things to her in her moment of distress. And
[Guest]: the way that's done is just an eye opener for what literature can achieve in terms of
[Guest]: putting us in the mind space of a problematic character or somebody who's doing something
[Guest]: problematic and making us empathize and perhaps seeing that we too are capable of such behavior,
[Guest]: you know, in the right context or the wrong context or whatever it is. I love that book
[Guest]: for that reason. I'm a big fan of Kazuo Ishiguro's confounding novel, The Unconsoled, which is
[Amit Varma]: his longest book. Which you've described memorably as a book that spends 500 pages going from
[Amit Varma]: point A to point A. Did I do that? Where? That's your description. See, you don't even
[Guest]: know what you've written. That's a pretty good description. I should start plagiarizing
[Guest]: myself now at some point. But no, so again, that's among Ishiguro's first 506 novels.
[Guest]: This was easily the least read, I think, and the one that I think was possibly the only
[Guest]: one of his first six books that wasn't shortlisted for the Booker Prize. I'm not sure if I got
[Guest]: that right. But it was definitely a book that confounded a lot of people for very good reason.
[Guest]: But I loved it because it was one of my first introductions in literature to the truly surrealistic
[Guest]: narrative, to what surrealism means on the page, in terms of creating this world that
[Guest]: is both seemingly real and completely exaggerated at the same time. Directions mean nothing,
[Guest]: where geography means nothing, time means nothing, everything is stretched out. I'd
[Guest]: encountered the equivalence for these things in the films of Buuel, for instance, or
[Guest]: in some of the paintings that I knew of Salvador Dali, The Persistence of Time, The Persistence
[Guest]: of Time, with the melting clocks. But I think this may have been the first time that I really
[Guest]: experienced its equivalent in a novel. And I was blown away by it all the more so because
[Guest]: I opened that book with no idea of what it was going to be like. I just thought it would
[Guest]: be a regular narrative story. And then I found myself having to figure the book out in the
[Guest]: process of reading it and figure out what this writer is trying to do. And it was a
[Guest]: fascinating experience. That's it, three of each?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, three of each. You're done. And in fact, when I read The Unconsoled, it gave me so
[Amit Varma]: much joy and delight. And I'm really glad I didn't have to write about the book because
[Amit Varma]: then I would have had to work so hard trying to articulate why it gave me that joy and
[Amit Varma]: delight. Because you're right, it's just a confounded book that way. And you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: Buuel's, you know, some of his surrealistic work. And I especially am a big fan of the
[Amit Varma]: last three films he made in the 70s, all of which were co-written with Jean-Claude Carrire,
[Amit Varma]: who I think died a few months ago. You know, The Discrete Charm of the Bourgeoisie, which
[Amit Varma]: is about a bunch of people who are sitting down to a meal, but they never actually eat
[Amit Varma]: anything. It's just they keep sitting down and the meal never happens. Then in 74, he
[Amit Varma]: made The Phantom of Liberty, which is again a delightful and confounding film, where you
[Amit Varma]: know, he'll start with the camera on a set of characters in a scene. And, you know, one
[Amit Varma]: of them seems to be the main guy, but then it'll follow some random person he meets and
[Amit Varma]: do another scene with that guy, and so on. And it's all disconnected. It's not even connected
[Amit Varma]: segments. It's all kind of disconnected, like, you know, passing the ball kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: And then finally, in 77, he made that Obscure Object of Desire, which included two actresses
[Amit Varma]: playing the same woman, thus, you know, adding to her mystique and all of that. So those
[Amit Varma]: three films of Buuel, which were made when he was in the 70s, if I remember correctly,
[Amit Varma]: and just in the 1970s, were...
[Guest]: So The Phantom of Liberty is a great favourite of mine as well. And Jean-Claude Carrier actually,
[Guest]: I spoke with Jean-Claude Carrier about it many years ago, around 15 years ago or something.
[Guest]: And he told me that the idea for that film just came from a little conversation he and
[Guest]: Buuel were having where they were saying, let's, why don't we do something that completely
[Guest]: defies the laws of narrative. So you know, so you have this, let's imagine the scene
[Guest]: where a husband and a wife are arguing ferociously about something. And we don't know exactly
[Guest]: what they're arguing about. But we know that their argument pivots on the contents of a
[Guest]: letter that is shortly to be delivered to their house. We figured this out from their
[Guest]: conversation. And they are fighting in this very abstract way, and there are tears and
[Guest]: recriminations. And then there's a knock on the door. And one of them opens the door and
[Guest]: the postman is standing there with the letter, hands the letter over to them. They start
[Guest]: to open the letter, the camera follows the postman out the door. And, and, and, you know,
[Guest]: to see what what he's up to next. And it's, yeah, it's a lovely film. So yeah, so, so
[Guest]: the unconsoled, as you can imagine, was also made me feel the same, you know, somewhat
[Guest]: similar to watching some of those Buuel films.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so I mean, you know, I think lots of dope people, you know, all the films and books
[Amit Varma]: and everything that we mentioned, we'll link it from the show notes. Jai, thank you so
[Amit Varma]: much. This has been a pleasurable conversation. I hope we can meet again in person and just
[Amit Varma]: chill and have coffee and go to bookshops. But I think that is going to take a while.
[Amit Varma]: But in the meantime, you must promise to come back again. And we'll talk more about Hindi
[Amit Varma]: cinema and Rishikesh Mukherjee. Do we have a date?
[Guest]: Yeah, no, no. Thanks a lot for calling me. This has been great to do this, you know,
[Guest]: and to do this over three or four hours or whatever it's been. That said, we definitely
[Guest]: need to do at least one follow up to this. Possibly two, possibly 10.
[Guest]: Man after my own heart.
[Guest]: Especially if this pandemic continues for another decade. So we'll, so yeah, thanks
[Guest]: so much. And, and yes, on a more serious note, that coffee should happen at some point too.
[Guest]: Please come to Delhi whenever it's safe to come here. And thanks, Rishikesh Mukherjee,
[Guest]: lots of other things to discuss as well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. Thanks a lot. We'll discuss all of that as for when, when is it safe to go
[Amit Varma]: to Delhi? Dude, I don't even feel like it's safe to go from Andheri to Bandra right now.
[Amit Varma]: But I have to get moving at some point. So hopefully we meet again and till then, adios.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out all the links in the show notes,
[Amit Varma]: enter rabbit holes at will. You can follow Jai on Twitter at Jai Arjun. You can follow
[Amit Varma]: me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the
[Amit Varma]: Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.